 ▐▛███▜▌   Claude Code v2.1.228
▝▜█████▛▘  Opus 5 · Claude Team
  ▘▘ ▝▝    ~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\circumfix-cross-pro…


❯ Plan complete and independently Luna-reviewed: GO.                            
                                                                                
    - .claude/worktrees/circumfix-cross-product/docs/superpowers/specs/2026-08- 
  11-candidate-filter-contract.md                                               
    - .claude/worktrees/circumfix-cross-product/docs/superpowers/plans/2026-08- 
  11-candidate-filter-first.md                                                  
                                                                                
    The plan provides:                                                          
                                                                                
    - Eleven filter-first implementation slices.                                
    - Streaming candidates and bounded death tracing.                           
    - Proof verification for every rejection.                                   
    - Structural → symbolic → boundary-local passes.                            
    - Rust filters growing into a hybrid trace DFA.                             
    - Shadow mode before enforcement.                                           
    - Exact HC multiplicity plus identity-set parity.                           
    - Fail-closed use of all five external oracle datasets.                     
    - Branch-wide safeguards against committing language data or derivatives.   
    - A frozen handoff contract for the later FST generator.                    
    - HC remains the unchanged authoritative confirmer.                         
                                                                                
    One important gate: partial or timeout-censored results—particularly        
  existing Aweti/Mbugwe scratch results—cannot certify a filter. Complete       
  oracle inputs must be read in place through PANGLOSS_CORPUS_ROOT;             
    nothing is copied or committed.                                             
                                                                                
    Artifact verification passed: two plan files, eleven tasks, zero            
  placeholders, zero trailing-whitespace findings. No Rust code, private        
  language data, commits, or tests were changed/run.                            
                                                                                
    Execution options:                                                          
                                                                                
    1. Subagent-driven (recommended): Luna agents implement bounded slices in   
  isolated worktrees, with primary review between slices.                       
    2. Inline execution: implement sequentially in this session with            
  checkpoints.                                                                  

  Read 2 files (ctrl+o to expand)

● Plan and contract are both on disk and read. Before I start Task 1, one
  decision is yours:

● User answered Claude's questions:
  ⎿  · How should the eleven slices be executed? → Subagent-driven
     · The plan and spec files are currently untracked in this dirty worktree. 
     Commit them first? → Commit plan + spec now

● Subagent-driven it is. First the plan commit — but one thing to settle from
  the plan's own text: it requires integration to happen in a clean worktree,
  not this dirty research one. Let me check the ground truth before choosing
  where that commit lands.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● circumfix-cross-product is main + 2 unrelated commits plus a dirty tree — a
  bad base for an 11-slice program whose own plan forbids using this worktree
  for integration. I'll land the plan commit on a dedicated branch off main
  instead, and leave your untracked files here untouched.

  Committed 591c111, ran 3 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Plan commit landed on candidate-filter-first (591c111), based exactly on main.
  Now setting up slice tracking.
● Agent(Implement slice 1 witness model)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Set up and slice 1 dispatched.

  Base correction worth flagging: the plan commit did not go onto
  circumfix-cross-product. That branch is main + 2 unrelated commits + a dirty
  tree, and the plan's own Task 11 forbids using this research worktree for
  integration. So the program lives on a dedicated branch instead:

  - Worktree .claude/worktrees/candidate-filter, branch candidate-filter-first,
  based exactly on main (a57e7ad), conformance submodule sparse-initialized.
  - Commit 591c111 — the plan and contract, those two files only.
  - Your untracked copies in circumfix-cross-product are untouched; I copied
  rather than moved them.

  One deviation from the plan's "isolated worktrees per agent": slices 1→2→3→4
  are strictly sequential (each compiles against the previous slice's types),
  and 5/6 both edit index.rs, passes/mod.rs, and validity.rs. Parallel worktrees
  there would buy nothing and cost rebases, so agents work one at a time
  directly in candidate-filter, and I review each commit before dispatching the
  next. This also keeps us inside the repo's 2–3 concurrent build cap. If a
  genuinely independent pair shows up later I'll fan out then.

  Slice 1 is running in the background — it freezes the witness model that the
  other ten slices compile against. Its brief pins the two places the plan and
  contract disagree (NonEmpty beats the Vec sketch), forbids
  sentinel-for-unknown, and requires it to paste real RED output rather than
  assert it saw one. I'll review the diff against the contract myself when it
  reports, per the repo's own warning that agents self-verify badly.

✻ Churned for 3m 40s

● Agent "Implement slice 1 witness model" finished · 16m 58s

● Slice 1 reports green. Reviewing the actual diff before I believe it.

  Read 2 files, ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Slice 1 verified independently — commit c3093db, tree clean, only the four
  intended files, and the model matches the contract rather than the plan's
  looser sketch. Two judgment calls the agent made are right:
  LexicalOrigin::revision() returns Option<u64> (a bare u64 would force
  StaticGrammar to report revision 0, which is exactly the sentinel-for-unknown
  the contract bans), and witnesses is NonEmpty, not Vec.

  One weakness I found that the agent didn't report:
  candidate_filter_contract.rs:144 asserts a deferred unit's allomorph list
  doesn't contain AllomorphId::GUESSED, but line 143 already asserts that list
  is empty — an empty vec contains nothing, so 144 can never fail. Harmless
  here, but the real GUESSED-injection risk lives in the Task 9 legacy adapter,
  so I'm carrying it forward as a required test there rather than churning this
  commit.
● Agent(Implement slice 2 filter pipeline)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Slice 1 accepted (c3093db, 9 tests, 542 lines). The frozen model:

  - ProposedCandidate { identity: tags::Candidate, witnesses: 
  NonEmpty<CandidateWitness> }, built through a new that rejects empty lists and
  duplicate WitnessIds.
  - TraceFact<T> = Known(T) | Deferred(DeferredFactReason), with Known(None)
  meaning proven absent and Deferred meaning not established — the distinction
  every later rejection depends on.
  - TraceSlotId/TraceStratumId/PartnerClassId/DeferredFeatureId are
  filter-contract identities, deliberately not aliases of grammar id spaces, so
  no pass can reject on evidence produced by ordinal coincidence.

  Slice 2 is now running: the multi-pass pipeline, any-witness-survives, and the
  fail-open budget. I sharpened one thing the plan left implicit — the budget
  must switch to bypass without collecting the remaining iterator, so I've
  required a test that fails if the implementation collects, since "streaming"
  is otherwise trivially claimable and unfalsifiable.

  I'll verify that commit the same way before slice 3 goes out.

✻ Sautéed for 2m 13s

● Agent "Implement slice 2 filter pipeline" finished · 1h 8m 11s

● Slice 2's report is unusually good — it falsified its own streaming test by
  temporarily inserting a .collect() and showing the failure. Verifying the rest
  myself, with attention to the new public test_support module it added beyond
  the plan.

  Read 1 file, ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Found a real hole the agent's own defense misses. test_support is
  unconditionally pub in the shipped crate, and allow_list_filter takes
  caller-supplied Box<dyn CandidateFilterPass> — and CandidateFilterPass is a
  public trait. So any downstream caller can implement a pass that rejects
  everything, author a RejectionProof whose fields it copies straight off the
  witness (they're all public), allow-list its own triple, and run Enforce.
  Every structural check in that verifier is trivially satisfiable by the
  forger, because the forger authors both the pass and the proof.

  That publicly bypasses the contract's headline guarantee. The agent's claim
  that a caller "cannot widen a proof into one that admits an arbitrary claim"
  is wrong for exactly this reason.

● Agent(Implement slice 3 proof verifier)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Slice 2 accepted (4b2c5fa, 24 tests: slice 1's 9 plus 15 new) with one
  required fix carried into slice 3.

  What it got right, verified: ProofVerifier and CandidateFilter::new are
  genuinely pub(crate); counters are BTreeMap-keyed; Shadow counts rejections
  while still emitting every candidate. And it falsified its own streaming test
  rather than asserting it — inserted a .collect() at the top of filter_into,
  showed the interleaving log flip from pull,pull,accept,pull,accept to
  pull,pull,pull,pull,accept,accept, then reverted. That's the standard this
  repo asks for and rarely gets.

  Three judgment calls I'm letting stand:

  - TraceFactKind instead of TraceFact — the plan's Task 4 snippet
  (DeferReason::MissingTraceFact(TraceFact::Slot)) simply doesn't compile
  against the frozen model; TraceFact is the generic Known/Deferred enum with no
  Slot variant. The agent's spelling is correct and I've told slice 3 not to
  re-litigate it.
  - Every witness is evaluated even after one survives — costs nothing today
  (the legacy adapter emits one witness per candidate) and buys
  order-independent evidence that slice 10's Off-vs-Enforce comparison needs.
  - candidates_rejected counts decisions, not removals, so Shadow reports both a
  rejection and a retention for the same candidate. That's what slice 9's
  shadow correlation will read.

  Slice 3 is running with the seam fix as Part A, gated behind a test-support
  feature and required to prove the gate refuses by compiling a probe without it
  — a gate nobody watched refuse isn't a gate. Part B is the production
  verifier, where I've added a requirement the plan omitted: every forged-proof
  test needs a paired positive case, otherwise a verifier that rejects
  everything passes the entire forgery suite.

✻ Brewed for 2m 14s

❯ How are we building these filters - we ahve the pgpack distribution format -  
  how does this "filter" step fit into there?  Explain the chosen architecture  
  and how we can distribute these filters in the WASM environment?  Can we ship 
  just configurations that are parsed and run?  Do we have to ship              
  bingrammar?aries per                                                          

● Good question, and it's one the plan genuinely doesn't answer — the contract
  stops at the Rust API boundary. Let me get the facts rather than reason from
  the name.

  Searched for 2 patterns, read 4 files (ctrl+o to expand)

● The plan is silent on this — deliberately scoped to the Rust API boundary,
  ending at a generator handoff contract, not a distribution contract. So part
  of this is "here's what the architecture already implies" and part is a real
  gap. Let me separate those, because the facts are better than I expected.

  What the filter is made of

  The design splits into two pieces with very different distribution stories:

  Grammar-independent code — the pipeline (filter_into, any-witness-survives,
  budget bypass), the nine proof categories, and the RejectionProofVerifier.
  Compiled once into whatever runtime you ship. Not per-grammar, not
  per-language.

  Grammar-derived data — FilterIndex (slice 4): morpheme ownership, rule
  ownership, POS/MPR signatures, slot/stratum transitions. Plus a profile name
  (StructuralV1 | SymbolicV1 | BoundaryLocalV1) — a closed enum, so an
  identifier, not code.

  So: no binaries per grammar. Configuration + derived tables, parsed and run
  against one compiled pass library.

  Slice 7 makes that stronger than it sounds. The trace DFA is transitions: 
  Vec<Vec<StateId>> plus rejecting: BTreeMap<StateId, ProofTemplate> — a
  table-driven recognizer, not generated code. Even the "compiled" fast path is
  pure data. That was chosen for testability (exhaustive equivalence against the
  imperative pass), but it happens to be exactly the property that makes
  filters shippable.

  Where it lands in .pgpack

  Container v1 is magic | version | 3 length prefixes | manifest JSON | runtime 
  payload | foma payload | SHA-256. Two hooks already fit:

  - required_runtime_features.extensions — open, append-only string set, checked
  at load as required ⊆ provided, where provided is derived from the build and
  never read from the file. A pack stamping candidate-filter.structural.v1 is
  refused by a runtime that lacks it, with a typed error rather than a crash.
  - package_fingerprint — SHA-256 binding the payloads together so they can't be
  mixed across grammars. A FilterIndex shipped alongside must be bound by the
  same fingerprint, or a "verified proof" degrades into "consistent with
  whatever index happened to load."

  Containment is the wrong direction for one risk, though. required ⊆ provided
  stops an old runtime from loading a pack needing new features. It does not
  stop a newer runtime from enforcing BoundaryLocalV1 on a pack certified only
  for StructuralV1 — the pack requires less, so containment passes happily.
  Since slice 10's whole promotion ladder is per-grammar and evidence-gated, the
  manifest needs a positive statement of which profiles are certified for this 
  grammar, and the runtime must enforce the intersection, not its own maximum.
  That's a genuine design gap, not something the existing mechanism covers.

  The blocker you should know about

  WASM can't run this yet, and not because of the filter. pg-wasm/src/pack.rs is
  a load-time envelope gate only — it validates the manifest, reports trust and
  health, and explicitly does not construct an analyzer. The reason is in
  pg-pack/src/format.rs:

  ▎ pg_grammar::model::Grammar is not serde-serializable today … the [runtime 
  ▎ payload] has no real producer yet anywhere in this workspace — its tests use
  ▎ only synthetic byte fixtures, honestly, because that is all that exists.

  The foma payload has a real producer (fsm_write_binary). The HC runtime
  payload does not. So today WASM ships a proposer it can't confirm with — and
  FilterIndex is derived from exactly the grammar facts that would ride in that
  unserialized payload. Making the filter distributable is downstream of
  make-wasm-analysis-only (the openspec change that exists for this), not of
  anything in the current eleven slices.

  Worth noting the filter helps most in that environment — single-threaded,
  tight memory, where cheap symbolic rejection before expensive derivational
  search matters more than it does on a 20-core box.

  What I'd change now, cheaply

  Two constraints on the in-flight work so we don't have to retrofit:

  1. FilterIndex must own its data, not borrow the grammar. The plan says it
  "owns immutable arrays/maps" — good — but also that it reuses
  MorphotacticIndex as the transition authority. If slice 4 holds a
  &MorphotacticIndex, the index stops being serializable and the whole
  data-not-binaries story needs surgery later. I'll require owned facts plus an
  explicit "this is derived from, and fingerprint-bound to, one grammar" shape.
  2. Stable IDs are already wire-ready — StablePassId(&'static str),
  StableRuleId { family, ordinal }, alphabet_version: u16. Nothing to do; just
  don't let a later slice replace them with array indices.

  I'd leave the actual pgpack section, profile stamping, and the
  certified-profile intersection rule as a separate change after slice 11,
  because it depends on decisions (runtime payload serialization) that this
  program doesn't own.

  Want me to fold constraint 1 into slice 4's brief now — it's the one that gets
  expensive to undo — and open an openspec change for the distribution half?

✻ Baked for 1m 28s

❯ I want you to send a sonnet subagent to plan out this formally and then       
  another one to challenge the plan.  Grill me on anything uncertain.  We need  
  this new filter stage shippable - and only with json or other simple data     
  structures to configure the filters.  Honestly, this may also end up          
  shrinking the backends to 1 (with the switches remaining).  Yes, every filter 
  needs to be runnable directly (with no configuration) or have a simple        
  configuration.  This is not released yet, so we have to regression to worry   
  about now, but we may add or update filters in the future.  Note that the     
  filters are strictly "not needed" because HC will clean up everything, it     
  will just run slower.  So, we want a "best effort" for understanding an       
  applying the filters, never applying if we believe we may throw away a valid  
  parse.                                                                        

● Before I send anyone, four things where guessing would produce a plan the
  challenger just shreds for reasons that are my fault.

  First, though — one correction to what I told you last turn. I suggested
  stamping filter profiles into required_runtime_features, which is the required
  ⊆ provided gate that refuses the load. Your "filters are strictly not needed,
  HC cleans up everything" makes that wrong. A filter is an optional
  accelerator, so an unknown or unsupported filter must degrade to "don't run
  it," never to a refused pack. That inverts the mechanism, and it's the right
  inversion.

● User answered Claude's questions:
  ⎿  · Where do the per-grammar filter facts (morpheme ownership, slot/stratum 
     transitions, POS/MPR signatures) come from at runtime? → We need the 
     grammar in the pack for HC - I think you are mistaken.  Generating the 
     filters from the grammar (assuming < 100ms) is fine.
     · If filter config is shipped, does it live inside the .pgpack or beside 
     it? → Inside the .pgpack
     · A shipped filter config doesn't match the grammar it's loaded against — 
     fingerprint mismatch, unknown pass ID, or version skew. What happens? → 
     Let's try to derive from the grammar
     · You floated collapsing to a single backend. How should this plan treat 
     that? → The filter is independant of the backend - we need to do nothing 
     now.

● Let me check that rather than take either of us on faith — it's load-bearing
  for the whole plan.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)
● Checked, and we're each right about different things.

  pub struct Grammar derives only Debug — no serde — and pg-cli/src/pack.rs
  passes PLACEHOLDER_RUNTIME_PAYLOAD to write_pack unconditionally, self-labeled
  "NOT a real payload." So that doc comment is current, not stale.

  But your architectural point is the stronger one and it changes my
  recommendation: HC needs the grammar in the pack regardless of filters. That
  serializer has to exist for WASM analysis at all. So deriving filters from the
  grammar adds zero new distribution requirement — the filter rides entirely on
  work HC already forces. That's a much better position than shipping a
  parallel index that can drift, and it kills the fingerprint-binding problem
  outright, since there's nothing to bind. I was solving a problem your answer
  deletes.

  Dispatching the planner with your decisions.

● Agent(Plan filter distribution formally) Sonnet 5
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● While the planner works — you invited grilling, and these four are
  higher-order than the first batch. The first one may be the most consequential
  question in the whole distribution story.

● User answered Claude's questions:
  ⎿  · A shipped grammar has no oracle data. So what makes a filter safe to run 
     on a grammar nobody has ever tested it against? → 1, but only if the 
     grammar shape itself doesn't change (it shouldn't, but we need to check 
     this).  It would also break HC-rust.  We also don't need to ship the XML 
     format, but can do an internal jsonb or similar to be more compact
     · Given per-grammar facts are now derived, is there any pack-time filter 
     configuration in v1 at all? → None — runtime decides
     · Derivation blows the ~100ms budget on a large grammar. What should 
     happen? → finish it and cache the results in the local WASM/deployed 
     desktop store.
     · Should the first shipped release enforce, or observe? → Enforce from day 
     one

● Those answers change the plan materially — the planner is working from a brief
  that predates them. Updating it in flight.
  ⎿  Message queued for delivery to a93e0d194cac84e66 at its next tool 
     round.

● Both agents are running. While they work, let me answer the thing you flagged
  as needing a check — whether the grammar model's shape is actually stable —
  since the whole sound-by-construction argument rests on it.

  Ran 3 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Concrete answer on the precondition you flagged:

  The grammar model is empirically stable. Over 90 days, 10 commits touch
  pg-grammar/src/model.rs, and most are cosmetic — the hc-*→pg-* rename, a
  comment sweep, doc-link fixes. Only four are substantive, each 6–15 net lines,
  one adding a single top-level item, none removing any. Your "it shouldn't
  change" holds up.

  But churn rate isn't the risk. The model has 16 enums — PhonRuleDef,
  MorphRuleDef, PatternNode, MprGroupMatchType, AllomorphOwner, and eleven more
  — and none is #[non_exhaustive]. The dangerous change is one added variant,
  which is a one-line commit that compiles cleanly everywhere a filter pass
  wrote _ =>. That's the silent-unsoundness path: a pass whose wildcard arm
  means "not applicable, keep going" starts treating a brand-new construct as
  harmless and discards a valid parse. HC-rust would likely break loudly on the
  same change; the filter would not.

  So the gate almost writes itself, and it's cheaper than a shape digest: no 
  filter pass may wildcard-match a grammar-model enum — either it enumerates
  every variant, or its wildcard arm returns Defer, never Keep. That converts
  "someone added a variant" from a silent soundness bug into either a compile
  error or a harmless loss of filtering. It's mechanically checkable and needs
  no versioning machinery at all.

  I'm feeding that to the challenger as a specific claim to attack rather than
  letting it emerge as a suggestion.

  Recorded decisions, all four:

  ┌───────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │               │                        Decision                         │
  ├───────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Soundness     │ By construction, conditional on grammar-model shape     │
  │               │ stability                                               │
  ├───────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Pack config   │ None in v1 — runtime decides, nothing written to        │
  │               │ .pgpack                                                 │
  ├───────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Budget        │ Finish derivation, cache in the local WASM/desktop      │
  │ overrun       │ store                                                   │
  ├───────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ First release │ Enforce from day one                                    │
  └───────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

  Two risks I'd flag before the challenger gets there. The cache reintroduces 
  exactly the staleness problem that deriving-from-grammar was chosen to delete
  — a cached index is derived data that can outlive its input, so its key has to
  cover both grammar identity and filter code version, or a stale hit silently
  enforces one grammar's facts against another. And enforce-from-day-one plus no
  customer oracle leaves no diagnosis path: a user whose parse goes missing
  can't isolate the filter as the cause. You didn't ask for a kill switch and
  I'm not overturning that, but I've asked the planner to price one rather than
  pass over it silently.

✻ Cogitated for 5m 49s

❯ Obviously a cache should be invalidated from an updated grammar or an updated 
  pangloss runtime.                                                             

● Agreed, and both keys already exist or are cheap:

  - Grammar — package_fingerprint in the pack manifest, already a SHA-256 over
  both framed payloads, so it changes whenever the grammar does.
  - Runtime — crate semver, which pg-wasm already reads from CARGO_PKG_VERSION_*
  for hc_port_semver.

  The one trap worth naming: semver doesn't move between dev builds, and this
  team is about to iterate on filter derivation daily. A rebuilt binary with
  changed derivation logic and an unchanged version string gets a stale cache
  hit that silently enforces yesterday's facts — and it'd hit you in
  development, where you're least likely to suspect the cache. Cheap fix with no
  machinery: don't cache in debug builds at all, and add an explicit
  schema-version constant alongside the semver for release builds. Caching only
  buys anything for a long-lived deployed runtime anyway.
  ⎿  Message queued for delivery to a93e0d194cac84e66 at its next tool 
     round.

● Sent. Still waiting on both background agents — slice 3 (verifier + Part A
  seam fix) and the distribution planner. The challenger goes out once the plan
  exists to attack.

✻ Churned for 46s

● Agent "Plan filter distribution formally" finished · 23m 24s

● Planner delivered. Two of its findings bear on code already written, so I'm
  verifying those before the challenger goes out.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Both planner findings check out, including one that kills my own suggestion:

  - [profile.pg-test-opt] inherits = "release", and release leaves
  debug-assertions at its default of false — so cfg(debug_assertions) is off
  under pg.ps1 -Mode test. My "don't cache in debug builds" fix would have been
  a silent no-op on the exact path you'd develop against. The build-script
  content hash it proposes instead is the right shape.
  - pipeline.rs:395 calls pass.evaluate(...) with no catch_unwind, and there's
  no panic guard anywhere in candidate_filter. A panicking pass currently takes
  down the whole analysis — which directly violates "filters are strictly not
  needed." Recording that as a requirement for slice 4, where the first real
  passes land.

● Agent(Challenge the distribution plan) Sonnet 5
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)
● Plan is 939 lines, well structured — and notably §8.1 is titled "Whether it
  earns its place," so the planner did question the cache rather than just
  building it. Reading the riskiest section myself while the challenger works.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Read §8 myself. The plan is more honest than I expected on the part I flagged
  as riskiest, and it caught two things I'd have missed:

  - Native has no grammar identity to key on. pangloss pack only writes packs;
  nothing native reads one back. So package_fingerprint doesn't exist on the
  native path, and the plan keys native on a SHA-256 of the raw grammar-source
  bytes taken before pg_grammar::load parses them — conservative by
  construction, since a grammar differing only in a comment the loader ignores
  hashes differently and simply re-derives rather than falsely hitting.
  - env! resolves against the compiling crate, so reading CARGO_PKG_VERSION_*
  inside pg-foma yields pg-foma's version, not pg-wasm's.

  Final key is (grammar_identity, pg_foma_semver, FILTER_INDEX_SOURCE_HASH, 
  FILTER_INDEX_SCHEMA_VERSION), where the source hash comes from a build.rs
  hashing only the files FilterIndex::derive actually depends on — deliberately
  not the whole candidate_filter tree, so iterating on a pass doesn't force
  spurious misses. That's mechanical rather than discipline-based, which is the
  right trade.

  Two things I'd highlight in its favor: it states plainly that the key is not
  airtight — the build-script file list is a human-maintained boundary and it
  says so instead of implying otherwise — and it recommends specifying the cache
  fully but not building the persistent store until measurement shows a grammar
  whose cold derivation cost actually justifies it. Given you asked for
  caching, it presents that as evidence for you rather than removing it
  unilaterally.

  The residual risk I'd still put on you: that build.rs file list is the one
  place a mistake reintroduces stale hits, and it's maintained by hand.

  Challenger is running against all of it now. I'll hold judgment on the rest of
  the plan until it reports, rather than pre-empting the attack I asked for.

✻ Cogitated for 2m 21s

● Agent "Implement slice 3 proof verifier" finished · 1h 30m 54s

● Slice 3 landed as two commits. Verifying, including the seam gate.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● All four checks pass. The gate is real (#[cfg(feature = "test-support")] plus
  the self dev-dependency), and no other crate requests test-support — pg-assess
  and pg-ffi ask only for test-concurrency-hook, so consumers are unaffected.
  admissible_proofs defaulting to empty means a pass that forgets to declare its
  rules can never kill anything: fail-closed and counted.

● Slice 3 accepted — a7e46f5 (seam gate) + a8fb35e (verifier), 30 + 12 tests
  green, tree clean.

  The forgery coverage is the real deliverable: 9 categories × 9 generic
  corruptions = 81, plus 25 payload corruptions and 8 deferred-fact cases. And
  it ruled out the failure mode I was most worried about — a verifier that
  refuses everything would pass every forgery test — three independent ways, the
  strongest being a permanent test that runs all 25 payload forgeries through a
  claim-blind verifier and requires each to kill there while being retained by
  the production verifier. That measures what the claim re-derivation is
  actually worth instead of assuming it. It reached that after trying a
  temporary if true { return Ok(()) } bypass, getting blocked by the permission
  classifier, and concluding the permanent test was the better answer. It is.

  Two things I'm holding it to account for rather than glossing:

  - It wrote the implementation before running RED, then reconstructed RED by
  moving the implementation to the scratchpad and restoring HEAD. It disclosed
  this unprompted. The output is genuine and does prove the tests can fail, so
  the evidence stands — but the ordering wasn't TDD, and I'll require the next
  agent to run RED before writing implementation.
  - It expects dead-code warnings in a plain build but never ran one. Reported
  as expectation, not observation, which is the right way to say it. Folding a
  clean-build check into slice 4.

  The finding that matters most for later: StaticCoOccurrenceViolation and
  StaticSignatureConflict are only half re-derived — the grammar-table half
  needs slice 4's FilterIndex. Neither can enter an enforced profile until then,
  which I've written into slice 10 so it can't be quietly promoted.

  I'm holding slice 4 until the challenger reports. Its second requirement — the
  no-wildcard-over-grammar-enums rule — is precisely what I asked the
  challenger to attack, and dispatching a large slice built on a rule that's
  about to be shredded would mean rework.

✻ Brewed for 1m 6s

● Agent "Challenge the distribution plan" finished · 10m 19s

● Challenger found something that matters more than the rest. Verifying its
  central claim against the code slice 3 just landed.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Both claims verified. The central one is real and it's the crux of the whole
  design.

  check_claim(witness, proof) takes no grammar access at all — and FilterContext
  carries only identity, candidate_ordinal, mode. So for categories like
  ForbiddenTransition, the verifier confirms the trace really has slots A and B,
  but nothing confirms the grammar forbids A→B. A pass or a FilterIndex that
  wrongly believes a transition is forbidden produces a proof that verifies
  perfectly and kills a valid candidate.

  That's precisely the failure the proof-carrying architecture exists to
  prevent, and it's fatal to "sound by construction" as the license to ship to
  grammars nobody has tested. Without grammar re-derivation, the verifier
  catches proof forgery and trace inconsistency — not wrongness. "By
  construction" quietly reduces to "the pass is correct," which is the thing we
  wanted evidence for.

  It also undercuts the cache story. The plan argues a bad cached index is "just
  a performance issue"; it isn't, because nothing downstream would catch it.

  There's a clean fix, and it makes the cache claim true. Give the verifier 
  &Grammar and have it re-derive the fact from the grammar directly — not from 
  the FilterIndex the pass used. Two independent readings of the same
  authoritative source catch pass logic bugs, and re-deriving from the grammar
  rather than the derived index also catches a wrong or stale derivation. A
  corrupted cache then produces rejections whose proofs fail verification →
  Defer → candidate retained. The cache genuinely becomes a performance-only
  concern.

  Cost: FilterContext carries grammar access, and each rejection pays a second
  fact lookup — on the path where we're already skipping an expensive HC
  confirmation, so the trade is good.

  The challenger's other findings, all verified or credible:

  - make_report.rs:655 calls pg_pack::read_pack in production — the plan's "no
  other caller" claim is false. Doesn't change its conclusion, but it was stated
  as verified.
  - The no-wildcard gate's mechanical check tests the wrong property — Task A
  asserts zero #[non_exhaustive] in model.rs, which is not the same as "every
  match site is exhaustive or defers," and it doesn't reach pg-rules helpers
  like morpheme_co_occurrence_rules_ok that slice 5 plans to call. This is
  exactly why I held slice 4.
  - Tasks D and E are scheduled before Task F's measurement despite §8 saying
  the store should be gated behind it.
  - Verdict: SALVAGEABLE, not sound.

● User answered Claude's questions:
  ⎿  · Should the proof verifier get grammar access so it can independently 
     re-derive the grammar fact behind each rejection? → I don't know what this 
     is for.  the verifier - is it really needed as a production system?  Would 
     it merely be a test harness or some research proof that is in markdown 
     somewhere and referenced in code?

● Fair challenge, and it exposes that my &Grammar recommendation was solving the
  wrong problem. Here's the honest accounting.

  What the verifier actually catches today. I checked: it validates the envelope
  (identity, witness id, grammar/lexicon revision, lexical origin, cited units)
  and then re-derives the claim against the witness's own trace — that unit 3
  really does carry slot A, that the allomorph set really was exhausted. So it
  catches exactly one bug class: a pass whose written claim contradicts the 
  trace it was looking at.

  What it does not catch: a pass whose grammar reasoning is wrong. If a pass
  wrongly believes slot A→B is forbidden, it emits a claim that is perfectly
  consistent with the trace, and the verifier passes it. That's the dominant
  risk, and it's untouched.

  And there is no adversary. Every pass is first-party compiled code in the same
  crate. Nothing untrusted authors a proof. So in production the verifier is
  our code checking our code against data our code just produced three lines
  earlier — that's an assertion, not verification. The whole forgery threat
  model that justifies 9 categories of payload is a test threat model.

  So: you're right, it isn't a production system. Where independent
  re-derivation genuinely belongs is the place your plan already puts it — the
  model-check tasks in slices 4/5/6, which compare each pass against an
  exhaustive reference predicate over small enumerated domains. That's where a
  second implementation is affordable, exhaustive rather than sampled, and
  actually independent. Test-time, not per-rejection.

  But the proof payload does earn its place in production — just not as
  something to verify. It's the explanation: the death ledger's "why did this
  candidate die," slice 9's shadow correlation, and a user's only diagnosis path
  under enforce-from-day-one. That's data you want carried, not checked.

  What I'd do, which is a net deletion:

  ┌──────────────────────────┬─────────────────────┬───────────────────────┐
  │                          │     Production      │     Test / shadow     │
  ├──────────────────────────┼─────────────────────┼───────────────────────┤
  │ Proof payload            │ carried as the      │ same                  │
  │                          │ diagnostic          │                       │
  ├──────────────────────────┼─────────────────────┼───────────────────────┤
  │ Envelope check           │ keep — near-free,   │                       │
  │ (identity, witness,      │ catches mis-wiring  │ same                  │
  │ revisions)               │                     │                       │
  ├──────────────────────────┼─────────────────────┼───────────────────────┤
  │ Claim re-derivation      │ drop from the hot   │ full, plus exhaustive │
  │                          │ path                │  reference predicates │
  └──────────────────────────┴─────────────────────┴───────────────────────┘

  That removes per-rejection cost, deletes the argument for giving the verifier
  grammar access, and leaves the safety story resting on the things that
  actually carry it: passes that defer on any uncertainty, the no-wildcard rule,
  the panic guard, fail-open everywhere.

  Two things this does not let us drop. Slice 3's 81 forgery tests stay valuable
  — they prove the test-time oracle is strict enough to be worth gating on. And
  it makes a kill switch more attractive, not less, since production loses a
  runtime backstop it never really had.

  Worth being clear about the cost: this re-scopes work slice 3 just landed. The
  code isn't wasted — RejectionProofVerifier becomes the test oracle — but
  filter_then_confirm in slice 9 would wire the cheap path, not the full one.

  Want me to re-scope it that way, or keep full verification in production and
  accept the cost for defense-in-depth?

✻ Cogitated for 3h 12m 1s

❯ rescope                                                                       

● Rescoping. Contract first, since the implementing agent must read the
  corrected version.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\specs\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-contract.md)
  ⎿  Added 37 lines, removed 3 lines
      119  proved no contradiction in the facts it owns, while `Defer` me
           ans it lacked sufficient certified
      120  facts.
      121  
      122 -A rejection proof contains a stable pass ID, rule ID, category
          -, and machine-checkable witness. The                          
      123 -pipeline calls the proof verifier before enforcement. An inval
          -id or unverifiable proof becomes                              
      124 -`Defer`; it is recorded as a proof-verification failure and ne
          -ver kills a witness.                                          
      122 +A rejection proof contains a stable pass ID, rule ID, category
          +, and machine-checkable witness. An                           
      123 +invalid or unverifiable proof becomes `Defer`; it is recorded 
          +as a proof-verification failure and                           
      124 +never kills a witness.                                        
      125  
      126 +How much of that proof is checked is an explicit, orthogonal k
          +nob, because the two halves buy                               
      127 +different things and cost different amounts:                  
      128 +                                                              
      129 +```rust                                                       
      130 +pub enum ProofCheckDepth {                                    
      131 +    Envelope,                                                 
      132 +    Full,                                                     
      133 +}                                                             
      134 +```                                                           
      135 +                                                              
      136 +`Envelope` re-checks the proof's identity, witness, grammar/le
          +xicon revision, lexical origin, and                           
      137 +that every unit a claim reads was cited. It is near-free, it c
          +atches mis-wiring — a proof paired                            
      138 +with the wrong witness, a stale revision, an uncited unit — an
          +d it is the production default.                               
      139 +                                                              
      140 +`Full` additionally re-derives the claim against the witness's
          + own trace. It is the default for                             
      141 +tests and for `Shadow`.                                       
      142 +                                                              
      143 +**`Full` is not a production safety mechanism, and the contrac
          +t does not pretend otherwise.** Every                         
      144 +pass is first-party compiled code in this crate; no untrusted 
          +party authors a proof, so there is no                         
      145 +forgery threat model at runtime. Re-deriving a claim catches e
          +xactly one bug class — a pass whose                           
      146 +written claim contradicts the trace it read — and it does *not
          +* catch the dominant risk, a pass                             
      147 +whose grammar reasoning is simply wrong, because such a pass e
          +mits a claim perfectly consistent                             
      148 +with the trace. Paying that cost on every rejection would buy 
          +narrow protection against an                                  
      149 +adversary that does not exist.                                
      150 +                                                              
      151 +Independent re-derivation therefore lives where it is affordab
          +le, exhaustive, and genuinely                                 
      152 +independent: the model/property tests, which compare each pass
          + against a separate reference                                 
      153 +predicate over completely enumerated small domains. That is a 
          +second implementation checking the                            
      154 +first, which is what "verified" should mean here.             
      155 +                                                              
      156 +What the proof carries in production is its *explanation* — th
          +e death ledger, shadow correlation,                           
      157 +and the only diagnosis a user has under enforcement. Proofs ar
          +e carried and recorded always;                                
      158 +`Full` checking of them is a testing and shadow instrument.   
      159 +                                                              
      160  Initial proof categories are finite and versioned:
      161  
      162  - malformed candidate identity;

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)
● Agent(Rescope proof checking depth)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Rescoped and in flight.

  Contract updated first (34bb3f7), because the reasoning needs to outlive this
  conversation. It now states plainly that Full checking is not a production
  safety mechanism, why — no untrusted party authors a proof, so the forgery
  threat model is a testing model — and where independent re-derivation actually
  lives: the model tests, which are a second implementation over exhaustive
  domains rather than the same code checking itself.

  Design: ProofCheckDepth { Envelope, Full }, deliberately orthogonal to
  FilterMode rather than derived from it, so Enforce + Full stays available as a
  debugging lever. Production defaults to Envelope; tests and Shadow default to
  Full.

  The requirement I care most about is the third test: a payload forgery that 
  Full refuses must be accepted at Envelope. That deliberately pins the weaker
  guarantee as a passing assertion rather than leaving it implied by absence —
  otherwise someone reads "verified" a year from now and assumes more than we
  deliver. Nothing is deleted; RejectionProofVerifier becomes the test and
  shadow instrument.

  I also told this agent to actually run a plain build. The previous one
  predicted dead-code warnings for six items and never ran one — an honest
  disclosure, but still an unverified claim sitting in the record.

  Sequencing now: slice 3b → slice 4. Slice 4 stays blocked, and it needs one
  correction before it goes out — the challenger showed its grammar-drift gate
  tests the wrong property (zero #[non_exhaustive] in model.rs is not "every
  match site is exhaustive or defers," and it misses the pg-rules helpers slice
  5 will call). I'll fix that requirement before dispatching rather than
  shipping a gate that checks something adjacent to what it claims.

  The distribution plan and its critique are both sitting in the scratchpad.
  Once slice 4 is moving I'd suggest folding the challenger's three blocking
  findings into the plan and landing it in docs/ as a real change — it shouldn't
  stay in a temp directory.

✻ Cooked for 2m 22s

❯ So, if I am correct:                                                          
  * for testing, we run the full rust HC and verify it against the              
  FST-filter-HC path.  If there is a failure, we see what the filter killed and 
  if we can blame it.                                                           
  * For production, we have a diagnostic "these were killed for this rule       
  viloation" and an evelope "it should only kill these types of things".        
                                                                                
  The evelope still feels a bit overenginered.  A simple diagnostic is nice,    
  especially if we are debugging a failure "ah, this candidate was killed from  
  filter C for viloation 14!"  but, in production, no one will care - accept    
  possibly as a diangostic when someone adds a word that was not accepted       
  before - but we can always re-derive the rejection when we get the diagnostic 
  back.                                                                         

● Your reasoning holds, and it deletes more than I proposed. Let me redirect the
  agent before it finishes building something we don't want.
  ⎿  Message queued for delivery to a9fb61280c81867f0 at its next tool 
     round.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\specs\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-contract.md)
  ⎿  Added 12 lines, removed 6 lines
      128  
      129  ```rust
      130  pub enum ProofCheckDepth {
      131 -    Envelope,                                                 
      131 +    Off,                                                      
      132      Full,
      133  }
      134  ```
      135  
      136 -`Envelope` re-checks the proof's identity, witness, grammar/le
          -xicon revision, lexical origin, and                           
      137 -that every unit a claim reads was cited. It is near-free, it c
          -atches mis-wiring — a proof paired                            
      138 -with the wrong witness, a stale revision, an uncited unit — an
          -d it is the production default.                               
      136 +`Off` performs no proof checking. A pass's `Reject` is taken a
          +t face value, while the proof is                              
      137 +still constructed, carried, and recorded. **This is the produc
          +tion default.**                                               
      138  
      140 -`Full` additionally re-derives the claim against the witness's
          - own trace. It is the default for                             
      141 -tests and for `Shadow`.                                       
      139 +`Full` re-checks the proof's identity, witness, grammar/lexico
          +n revision, lexical origin, and cited                         
      140 +units, and re-derives the claim against the witness's own trac
          +e. It is the default for tests and                            
      141 +for `Shadow`.                                                 
      142  
      143 +There is deliberately no middle tier. An envelope-only check w
          +as considered and rejected: the                               
      144 +pipeline hands a witness to a pass, the pass builds a proof fr
          +om that same witness, and an envelope                         
      145 +check then re-verifies that the proof matches the witness the 
          +pipeline just supplied. That is                               
      146 +first-party code checking itself, which is the same reasoning 
          +that moved claim checking out of                              
      147 +production, applied one level further.                        
      148 +                                                              
      149  **`Full` is not a production safety mechanism, and the contrac
           t does not pretend otherwise.** Every
      150  pass is first-party compiled code in this crate; no untrusted 
           party authors a proof, so there is no
      151  forgery threat model at runtime. Re-deriving a claim catches e
           xactly one bug class — a pass whose

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\specs\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-contract.md)
  ⎿  Added 13 lines
      163  and the only diagnosis a user has under enforcement. Proofs ar
           e carried and recorded always;
      164  `Full` checking of them is a testing and shadow instrument.
      165  
      166 +**Reproducibility is what replaces runtime checking, and it is
          + therefore a requirement, not a                               
      167 +convenience.** A recorded rejection names its pass, rule, cate
          +gory, candidate identity, and                                 
      168 +witness. That, plus the grammar, is enough to re-run the same 
          +word offline at `Full`, or with                               
      169 +filtering off entirely, and re-derive exactly what happened. P
          +aying to check every rejection is not                         
      170 +needed in order to explain any rejection later. This holds onl
          +y while filtering is deterministic,                           
      171 +so determinism is pinned by test: the same passes, input, mode
          +, and budget must produce identical                           
      172 +retained sets, identical decisions, and an identical ledger, i
          +ncluding event ordinals and pass                              
      173 +order.                                                        
      174 +                                                              
      175 +It follows that the runtime switch which disables filtering is
          + not a nicety. It is the primary                              
      176 +diagnostic instrument: the first question about a word that st
          +opped parsing is whether it parses                            
      177 +with filtering off, and that answer isolates the filter from t
          +he proposer and from HC in one step.                          
      178 +                                                              
      179  Initial proof categories are finite and versioned:
      180  
      181  - malformed candidate identity;

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Done — ProofCheckDepth { Off, Full }, agent redirected, contract updated
  (adfa11a).

  Your two bullets are right, with one refinement on the first that matters for
  blame assignment. There are really two different comparisons, and only one of
  them can convict the filter:

  - Off vs Enforce, same proposer, filter as the only variable. A difference
  here is the filter's fault, necessarily. This is slice 10's gate, on both
  deduplicated AnalysisIdentity sets and exact WordAnalysis multisets.
  - Full HC vs the FST path, which is what you described. This tests proposer
  and filter together, so a failure can't be blamed on the filter without the
  first comparison to disambiguate. Still worth having — it's the existing
  parity machinery, and it catches proposer gaps the filter can't — but it's a
  different question.

  So the debugging order on a failure is: does it parse with filters off? If
  yes, filter. If no, proposer.

  One consequence you may not have intended. Once runtime checking is gone,
  reproducibility carries the entire safety story — "we can re-derive it from
  the diagnostic" only works if the same inputs always produce the same
  decisions. So determinism stops being a nice property and becomes a tested
  requirement; I've pinned it in the contract and added a test to the slice.

  And it promotes the kill switch you declined earlier. Not as insurance — as
  the primary diagnostic instrument. Under the design as it now stands, the
  first question about a word that stopped parsing is "does it parse with
  filtering off," and that single answer isolates the filter from the proposer
  and from HC. Without the switch, a user's only path is to send you a grammar
  and wait. I've written that into the contract as reasoning rather than as a
  decision, since it's your call — but the argument for it is materially
  stronger than when you turned it down, because it's no longer redundant with a
  runtime check that no longer exists.

  Net deletion from where we started: no per-rejection claim re-derivation, no
  envelope tier, no &Grammar on the verifier, no FilterContext change to carry
  it. What production keeps is a proof record and deterministic counters.

✻ Crunched for 1m 58s

❯ You keep assuming that the filters will have errors that the users will know  
  about and report on.  This is a spell checker - it "just works" or "doesn't   
  work".  We need to iron all this out before deployment in testing.            

● You're right, and I've been repeating that assumption for three messages.
  There's no feedback loop — a spell checker that silently drops a word produces
  no bug report, just a slightly worse tool. So production diagnostics have
  almost no value, and the kill-switch-as-diagnostic argument I just made
  collapses with them. FilterMode::Off already exists for the harness; nothing
  new needs building. That's another deletion.

  The real consequence is that the entire safety burden moves to pre-deployment,
  and the bar for those gates has to rise to match, because nothing downstream
  will ever catch what they miss.

  That lands hardest on slice 8. The plan already refuses to certify on partial
  evidence — an incomplete or timeout-censored oracle is recorded NotDetermined
  and fails, explicitly — but it also documents what's actually available today:

  - Indonesian: a 121-word parity run
  - Sena: sampled, not complete
  - Amharic: excludes timed-out rows
  - Aweti: bounded and partial
  - Mbugwe: no committed word-parity harness at all

  Under the old design that was one gate among several. Under no-field-feedback
  it's the whole thing — and by its own fail-closed rule, zero of the five would
  certify today. That's the honest status, and it's the thing to fix before
  anything ships, not the filter code.

  What substitutes for field feedback is completeness, and there are two kinds
  available:

  - Exhaustive model checks over small enumerated domains (slices 4–6). These
  are complete rather than sampled — every trace up to length 4, every subset of
  3 allomorphs, every truth assignment. A pass that survives those is proven on
  its whole domain, not spot-checked. This is the strongest evidence in the
  program and it's cheap.
  - Complete, uncensored oracle runs on all five corpora. Every word, no
  sampling, no timeout exclusions — a timeout is a non-answer, and treating it
  as a pass is exactly how a filter bug would hide.

  The second is the expensive one and it's where the work is: full word lists
  rather than samples, and resolving the Amharic timeouts and the missing Mbugwe
  harness rather than excluding them.

  So before slice 4 goes out, one thing to settle: is "all five corpora,
  complete and uncensored, zero oracle-positive kills, plus exhaustive model
  checks per pass" the deployment bar? If so, the Amharic timeout resolution and
  a Mbugwe harness become prerequisites for shipping and probably want to start
  in parallel — they're likely slower than the filter work itself. If the bar
  is lower, I'd rather know now than build the gates twice.

✻ Brewed for 41s

❯ We should have "golden analysis sets" from C# HC.  Those are our comparison   
  sets - and should be our main ones (at least now).  Our conformance grammars  
  are being built up (in another worktree) and will carry the full load before  
  all is done.  That load is carried by "run this HC-rust and then with the     
  FST-filter-HC-rust" and if there are misses (during test), we should look at  
  the filter rejections and debug from there.                                   
                                                                                
  Does that make sense?                                                         

● That makes sense, and it's better than what I was building toward. Let me
  check what the fixtures actually carry so I'm not guessing at the shape.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Yes — and it's better than where I was heading, mainly because it's synthetic
  and committed, so the primary gate runs in CI with no private-corpus
  dependency at all.

  Three things worth adding, one of which is a correction to your framing.

  For the filter specifically, the strongest oracle isn't a golden file — it's 
  HC-rust live in the same binary. Your loop is "run HC-rust, then
  FST-filter-HC-rust, compare." Slice 10 already does exactly that as Off vs
  Enforce, in one process, same grammar, same build. That's stronger than
  comparing against a transcribed golden set because there's no transcription
  step and nothing to go stale. The filter's obligation is precisely HC(F(P(w)))
  == HC(P(w)), and both sides are computable on the spot.

  The C# golden sets answer a different question — whether HC-rust is right at
  all. Essential, but a port-correctness question, not a filter question. If
  HC-rust and the golden set disagree, the filter is innocent.

  A caveat I hit while checking. The staged fixtures aren't uniformly
  C#-derived. One says so in its own header:

  ▎ Oracle: pangloss (pg_parse::Morpher, driven directly) — NOT the C# founding 
  ▎ oracle — authored and verified against this repo's own Rust engine only. 
  ▎ Signatures below are transcribed verbatim from that run, not hand-derived.

  So parts of conformance-staging/ are self-oracled against Rust. That's fine
  for filter validation — pinning HC-rust's own behavior is exactly what the
  filter must not perturb — but it means those fixtures can't serve as ground
  truth for the port. The 25 upstream machine/conformance fixtures are the
  C#-founded ones. Worth knowing which set you're leaning on for which claim.

  The blind spot in the loop as stated: "run both, look at misses" passes
  perfectly for a filter that rejects nothing. Zero misses and zero value are
  indistinguishable by that comparison alone. Slice 10 already pairs it with a
  fire count — nonzero verified rejections, strictly fewer candidates reaching
  HC — and that pairing has to survive; a green run with zero firing is a
  non-result, not a pass.

  Given all that, I'd reframe slice 8: demote the five private corpora from 
  primary gate to supplementary, and make Off-vs-Enforce over the conformance
  fixtures the primary gate. That deletes the corpus-availability dependency
  from the critical path, kills the privacy surface, and makes the main gate
  reproducible by anyone. The private corpora still earn a place — real grammars
  hit construct combinations synthetic ones don't — but as a secondary check
  whose absence doesn't block, rather than a fail-closed prerequisite nobody can
  currently satisfy.

  The one dependency that framing exposes: the conformance grammars carrying
  "the full load" is the other worktree's work, so the filter's deployment
  readiness is gated on their coverage, not on filter code. Worth knowing whose
  critical path that actually is.

  Want me to rewrite slice 8 along those lines before slice 4 goes out?

✻ Worked for 1m 16s

❯ Let's go as far as we can without the other worktree's work.  For the tests,  
  we should have verification for each filter type - asserting that certain     
  traces (or that a certain number) of traces are removed by a specific filter. 
   Each one needs to hold it's own weight.  ANd for that, we will need the      
  conformance grammar work from the other worktree.  Urg.                       
                                                                                
  Let's pull that worktree's work into here and to it first.  It is really      
  needed to be able to have testing of the filters in any real sense.  here is  
  the exported session.  The other agent stopped:                               
  C:\Users\johnm\Documents\repos\PanGloss.claude\worktrees\machine-hc-semantic- 
  catalog\2026-08-12-033759-here-is-work-left-by-codex-find-it.txt              
                                                                                
  How do you propose to merge and combine the work?                             

● Let me get the actual state before proposing anything — merge strategy depends
  entirely on what's there and how it's based.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● That reframes the question completely — machine-hc-semantic-catalog isn't a
  PanGloss worktree at all. git worktree list doesn't know it, main doesn't
  resolve there, and it contains Machine.sln, .csharpierrc.yaml, and
  conformance/. It's a checkout of the C# machine repo, on branch
  docs/hc-semantic-catalog.

  Read 1 file, ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)
● Before the merge mechanics — the premise needs correcting, because this isn't
  the conformance-grammar work.

  What's actually there. Branch docs/hc-semantic-catalog, 15 commits, clean,
  4,992 lines across 11 files. But the files are
  Conformance/SemanticCoverage/DtdInventoryReader.cs, CSharpInventoryReader.cs
  (Roslyn), HermitCrab/SemanticBranch.cs, and a coverage-catalog doc. That's a
  source-analysis tool that inventories what HC semantically does — DTD
  surfaces, C# types, semantic operations. It's the instrument that tells you
  which conformance grammars you still need. It does not produce grammars or
  expected analyses.

  And you can't merge it. It's a checkout of sillsdev/machine — remote
  github.com/sillsdev/machine.git, based on origin/conformance-framework, no
  main in that repo. PanGloss consumes it only as a submodule pinned at caa4ddd.
  So there is no branch merge available; the only mechanism is:

  1. Verify the claimed 61/61 dotnet gate — the previous agent explicitly did
  not run it, so that number is unverified.
  2. Land the commits on conformance-framework upstream.
  3. In PanGloss: git -C machine checkout <new sha>, commit the gitlink, done.

  That's a one-line change to PanGloss whenever it's ready. Nothing about the
  filter work needs to wait for it.

  Its state argues against blocking too. The plan there has Tasks 0, 1, 2A done
  and 2B–10 open — 50 steps. Task 2B is explicitly blocked on "the other agent's
  backend fixes and the Task 3 audit seam," and Codex stopped because its tool
  allowance is exhausted until August 18. Serializing the filter program behind
  that is weeks of idle time for a dependency that answers a different question.

  What you actually asked for is buildable today. "Verification for each filter
  type — assert that specific traces are removed by a specific filter, each one
  holds its own weight" needs purpose-built fixtures per pass: a grammar where
  the ownership pass fires and nothing else does, one where the transition pass
  fires, and so on. That's authored grammars plus expected analyses, and this
  repo already has the machinery — .claude/skills/conformance-grammars, 25
  staged fixtures in conformance-staging/, and the established pattern of a
  pathology-mimic grammar per construct. No C# catalog required.

  The catalog answers "have we covered every HC construct anywhere?" That's a
  global completeness audit, and it's genuinely valuable — but it's a later gate
  over the whole fixture corpus, not a prerequisite for proving one filter
  earns its weight.

  So what I'd propose:

  - Don't block. Keep the submodule at caa4ddd. Bump the pin when the C# work
  lands, as a standalone one-line change.
  - Add a slice before slice 4: author one staged conformance fixture per
  planned pass, each with a grammar that triggers exactly that pass, plus the
  assertion that the pass fires a specific nonzero number of times and that Off
  and Enforce produce identical analyses. That is precisely "each filter holds
  its own weight," and it makes every later pass slice testable the moment it's
  written.
  - When the catalog lands, run it as a coverage audit over the fixture corpus
  to find constructs no fixture exercises — the thing it's actually good at.

  The one real cost of not waiting: fixtures we author now are guided by our own
  judgment about which HC constructs matter, and the catalog might later reveal
  a construct we never thought to cover. That's a gap the catalog closes by 
  adding fixtures, not by invalidating existing ones.

  Want me to write that per-filter fixture slice and slot it in ahead of slice
  4?

✻ Cogitated for 1m 39s

❯ Do it                                                                         

● Writing it into the plan as Task 3c, ahead of Task 4.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\plans\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-first.md)
  ⎿  File must be read first

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\plans\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-first.md)
  ⎿  Added 104 lines
      378  git commit -m "feat(pg-foma): verify filter rejections and rec
           ord trace deaths"
      379  ```
      380  
      381 +## Task 3c: Per-pass conformance fixtures and the fire-count h
          +arness                                                        
      382 +                                                              
      383 +Every pass must earn its place on evidence, not on argument. T
          +his task front-loads the slow,                                
      384 +judgment-heavy half of that — authoring a synthetic grammar th
          +at provokes one specific pass — so                            
      385 +each later pass slice lands against a fixture already waiting 
          +for it.                                                       
      386 +                                                              
      387 +It deliberately precedes the passes themselves. A fixture pins
          + HC-rust's own analyses for a                                 
      388 +construct, which is exactly the reference a pass must not pert
          +urb, and that reference is authorable                         
      389 +before any pass exists.                                       
      390 +                                                              
      391 +**Files:**                                                    
      392 +                                                              
      393 +- Create: `conformance-staging/filter-passes/<pass>/grammar.xm
          +l` and `words.yaml`, one directory per                        
      394 +  planned pass                                                
      395 +- Create: `conformance-staging/filter-passes/<pass>/filter-exp
          +ectation.json`                                                
      396 +- Create: `rust/crates/pg-foma/tests/candidate_filter_fixture_
          +weight.rs`                                                    
      397 +- Modify: `conformance-staging/STAGING.md` to record each new 
          +fixture and its target pass                                   
      398 +                                                              
      399 +- [ ] **Step 1: Author one fixture per planned pass**         
      400 +                                                              
      401 +Directories: `ownership`, `structural-transition`, `slot-order
          +`, `co-occurrence`,                                           
      402 +`static-signature`, `allomorph-compatibility`, `exact-span`, `
          +local-environment`.                                           
      403 +                                                              
      404 +`partner-pairing` gets a directory containing only `filter-exp
          +ectation.json` with                                           
      405 +`"status": "not-yet-provokable"` and a note recording why: the
          + grammar model compiles circumfix                             
      406 +halves into one cross-product allomorph, so no authored gramma
          +r can currently produce the partner                           
      407 +events that pass consumes. Recording that as data, not prose, 
          +keeps it from being mistaken for an                           
      408 +oversight.                                                    
      409 +                                                              
      410 +Follow `.claude/skills/conformance-grammars/SKILL.md`. **Synth
          +etic data only** — no actual-language                         
      411 +data, and no file, feature, or symbol named after a language. 
          +Where a fixture mimics a real                                 
      412 +language's pathology, name the pathology and put the family in
          + a comment, exactly as the existing                           
      413 +staged fixtures do.                                           
      414 +                                                              
      415 +Each grammar must provoke its target pass and, as far as pract
          +ical, not the others: a fixture that                          
      416 +trips four passes cannot show that any one of them earns its p
          +lace.                                                         
      417 +                                                              
      418 +- [ ] **Step 2: Pin expected analyses against HC-rust, transcr
          +ibed not hand-derived**                                       
      419 +                                                              
      420 +Drive `pg_parse::Morpher` directly and transcribe its output v
          +erbatim into `words.yaml`, following                          
      421 +the header convention the existing staged fixtures use — which
          + records the oracle used and states                           
      422 +plainly that it is this repo's Rust engine, not the C# foundin
          +g oracle. Do not hand-derive a                                
      423 +signature; a hand-derived expectation is a guess with a test a
          +round it.                                                     
      424 +                                                              
      425 +Include, per fixture, both words the target pass must not dist
          +urb and words whose invalid analyses                          
      426 +it should eventually remove.                                  
      427 +                                                              
      428 +- [ ] **Step 3: Declare each fixture's expectation as data**  
      429 +                                                              
      430 +```json                                                       
      431 +{                                                             
      432 +  "pass_id": "structural.ownership.v1",                       
      433 +  "min_fire_count": 1,                                        
      434 +  "status": "awaiting-pass"                                   
      435 +}                                                             
      436 +```                                                           
      437 +                                                              
      438 +`status` is `awaiting-pass`, `wired`, or `not-yet-provokable`.
          + `min_fire_count` is the number of                            
      439 +verified rejections that pass must produce over this fixture's
          + words once it exists.                                        
      440 +                                                              
      441 +- [ ] **Step 4: Write the harness and its anti-rot gate**     
      442 +                                                              
      443 +`candidate_filter_fixture_weight.rs` walks `conformance-stagin
          +g/filter-passes/**` and, per fixture:                         
      444 +                                                              
      445 +- asserts `Off` and `Enforce` yield identical deduplicated `An
          +alysisIdentity` sets and identical                            
      446 +  exact `WordAnalysis` multisets — the property that holds at 
          +every stage, including now, when no                           
      447 +  passes exist;                                               
      448 +- for a `wired` fixture, asserts its declared pass fired at le
          +ast `min_fire_count` times.                                   
      449 +                                                              
      450 +The anti-rot gate is the point of the `status` field and must 
          +fail loudly in three cases: a fixture                         
      451 +still `awaiting-pass` whose `pass_id` now exists in the pass r
          +egistry; a fixture naming a `pass_id`                         
      452 +neither registered nor in the plan's declared pass list; and a
          + registered pass with no fixture at                           
      453 +all. Without it, a fixture that never gets wired reads as cove
          +rage while asserting nothing.                                 
      454 +                                                              
      455 +- [ ] **Step 5: Run the fixture gate**                        
      456 +                                                              
      457 +```powershell                                                 
      458 +& rust\tools\pg.ps1 -Mode conformance-test -Scope local -Packa
          +ge pg-foma -TestTarget candidate_filter_fixture_weight        
      459 +```                                                           
      460 +                                                              
      461 +Expected: every fixture parses, every expectation file is well
          +-formed, every `Off`/`Enforce`                                
      462 +comparison is equal, and the anti-rot gate passes. With no pas
          +ses yet built, every fixture is                               
      463 +`awaiting-pass` and no fire count is asserted — that is the co
          +rrect state, and the gate reports it                          
      464 +rather than showing a vacuous green.                          
      465 +                                                              
      466 +- [ ] **Step 6: Confirm the fixtures join the existing suite c
          +leanly**                                                      
      467 +                                                              
      468 +```powershell                                                 
      469 +& rust\tools\pg.ps1 -Mode conformance-test -Scope local       
      470 +```                                                           
      471 +                                                              
      472 +Expected: the pre-existing staged fixtures still pass and the 
          +new ones are discovered and validated                         
      473 +by the same machinery, since they live under `conformance-stag
          +ing/**`.                                                      
      474 +                                                              
      475 +- [ ] **Step 7: Commit the fixtures and harness**             
      476 +                                                              
      477 +```powershell                                                 
      478 +git add conformance-staging/filter-passes conformance-staging/
          +STAGING.md rust/crates/pg-foma/tests/candidate_filter_fixture_
          +weight.rs                                                     
      479 +git commit -m "test(conformance): stage per-pass filter fixtur
          +es and the fire-count gate"                                   
      480 +```                                                           
      481 +                                                              
      482 +Each later pass task adds its own fixture wiring: flip `status
          +` to `wired`, set the real                                    
      483 +`min_fire_count`, and let the harness enforce it.             
      484 +                                                              
      485  ## Task 4: Build the immutable grammar fact index and structur
           al passes
      486  
      487  **Files:**

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Written in as Task 3c and committed (dc7a42b), sequenced 3b → 3c → 4.

  The shape, and the one design decision worth your eye:

  Fixtures are authorable now, before any pass exists. A fixture pins HC-rust's
  own analyses for a construct — which is precisely the reference a pass must
  not perturb. So the slow, judgment-heavy half (authoring a synthetic grammar
  that provokes one pass and as few others as possible) front-loads, and each
  later pass slice lands against a target already waiting.

  Nine directories under conformance-staging/filter-passes/. Eight are
  authorable. partner-pairing gets an expectation file marked not-yet-provokable
  with the reason recorded as data: the grammar model compiles circumfix halves
  into a single cross-product allomorph, so no authored grammar can produce the
  partner events that pass consumes. Better as a machine-readable declaration
  than a comment someone later mistakes for an oversight.

  The mechanism that makes this real is the anti-rot gate. A fixture with no
  assertion is worse than no fixture — it reads as coverage while proving
  nothing. So each carries { pass_id, min_fire_count, status }, and the harness
  fails loudly on three conditions: a fixture still awaiting-pass whose pass now
  exists in the registry, a fixture naming an unknown pass, and a registered
  pass with no fixture at all. That last one is what stops a pass from quietly
  shipping without evidence.

  Right now every fixture is awaiting-pass and no fire count is asserted. The
  gate reports that state explicitly rather than showing a green that means
  nothing — which is the same standard I've been holding the slices to.

  Two things I did not do, deliberately:

  - The submodule pin stays at caa4ddd. The C# semantic-catalog work is a
  different repository and 50 open steps blocked until August 18; bumping the
  pin is a one-line change whenever it lands.
  - Expected analyses come from pg_parse::Morpher, transcribed verbatim — same
  convention the existing staged fixtures document, including their honesty that
  the oracle is this repo's Rust engine and not the C# founding oracle. A
  hand-derived signature is a guess with a test wrapped around it.

  Slice 3b is still running in the worktree (I can see its in-progress edits to
  pipeline.rs, test_support.rs, and both test files). I staged only the plan
  file. Once it reports and I've verified it, 3c goes out.

✻ Baked for 2m 23s

● Agent "Rescope proof checking depth" finished · 43m 39s

● Slice 3b landed. One of its disclosed assumptions is a real question, and the
  answer depends on where the ledger gets its pass identity — checking that.

  Read 1 file, ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Confirmed, and it's a real defect. PassEvent.pass_id comes from pass.id() (the
  pipeline's own knowledge, line 492), but WitnessDeath.pass_id comes from 
  proof.pass_id (line 502) — and at Off nothing checks the two agree.

  WitnessDeath is the production diagnostic. So a pass that stamps its proof
  with another pass's ID produces a death record blaming the wrong filter, and
  since re-deriving offline now starts from that record, the investigation
  starts in the wrong place. The fix is better than restoring the guard the
  agent removed: take the ledger's identity from pass.id() too, making
  mislabeling impossible by construction rather than merely detected.

● Agent(Fix death record pass attribution)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Slice 3b accepted (ae722d2) — 31 + 16 tests green, plain build succeeds.

  ProofCheckDepth { Off, Full } with for_mode mapping Shadow → Full and
  everything else to Off. Depth is threaded as a parameter rather than hung on
  FilterContext, deliberately, so a pass cannot see or branch on it — a pass
  that behaved differently when checked would defeat the point.

  The test pinning the reduced guarantee is stronger than I asked for. I
  specified payload forgeries; it covers all 106 (25 payload + 81 generic), and
  each iteration asserts the same forgery is refused at Full and kills a real
  witness at Off. It cannot pass unless depth genuinely changes behavior. The
  assertion message spells out that production takes a rejection at face value
  "however corrupt its proof is" — which is exactly the fact that should be hard
  to miss in a year.

  Three disclosures worth surfacing:

  - 23 dead-code warnings in a plain build — RejectionProofVerifier and its
  helpers now reach production through nothing, since their only entry point
  sits behind the test-support feature. The agent argued from the call graph
  that these pre-date its change rather than measuring a baseline, and said so
  rather than implying it had measured. That's correct reasoning and honestly
  labeled. It also declined to paper over them with #[allow(dead_code)], and
  disclosed the one #[allow] it did add.
  - Two existing contract tests changed meaning. The allow-list seam no longer
  constrains anything at the production default, so those tests now request Full
  explicitly. Assertions unchanged — but the behavior they describe no longer
  exists in production, which is the intended consequence of your decision,
  stated plainly.
  - The determinism test found no nondeterminism across identical runs — same
  retained identities, same PassEvent vectors, same deaths, same counters.
  That's the property the whole offline-re-derivation story depends on, now
  pinned.

  The attribution fix is running. Once it lands, slice 3c (the per-pass
  fixtures) goes out, then slice 4 — which by then carries three requirements it
  didn't start with: the panic guard, the no-wildcard-over-grammar-enums rule,
  and an owned (not borrowed) FilterIndex.

✻ Cogitated for 1m 43s

❯ Remove the dead code- or if is needed for test, move it there.                

● Those 23 are all one cluster: RejectionProofVerifier, its check_*/established*
  helpers in proof.rs, CandidateFilter::{new, verifying}, and
  admissible_catalog — reachable only through test_support::verified_filter,
  which is already feature-gated. So it's test-only code sitting in production
  modules.

  Gating it behind test-support works, but it leaves a wart: CandidateFilter
  would carry a verifier field that exists only under a feature, and the Full
  arm of admit would have to be cfg'd out too. That messiness is a signal.

  The alternative is to notice that if production never checks, the pipeline 
  doesn't need a verifier at all. Verification becomes post-hoc: run the filter
  with a ledger, then assert every proof it recorded verifies. That's a stronger
  test than the current one — "no bad proof was emitted" beats "the pipeline
  declined to act on a bad proof" — and it deletes ProofCheckDepth, the verifier
  field, the admit branch, and PassOutcome::ProofRejected along with the dead
  code.

  Cost: it discards ProofCheckDepth, which landed twenty minutes ago.

● User answered Claude's questions:
  ⎿  · How far should the dead-code cleanup go? → Post-hoc verification 
     (recommended)
● Post-hoc it is. Updating the contract now; the refactor waits for the
  attribution fix to land first, since both touch pipeline.rs.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\specs\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-contract.md)
  ⎿  Added 18 lines, removed 17 lines
      123  invalid or unverifiable proof becomes `Defer`; it is recorded 
           as a proof-verification failure and
      124  never kills a witness.
      125  
      126 -How much of that proof is checked is an explicit, orthogonal k
          -nob, because the two halves buy                               
      127 -different things and cost different amounts:                  
      126 +**The pipeline performs no verification.** A pass's `Reject` i
          +s acted on directly; the proof is                             
      127 +constructed, carried, and recorded as evidence. There is no ve
          +rifier in the filter, no check                                
      128 +before enforcement, and no knob selecting how much to check.  
      129  
      129 -```rust                                                       
      130 -pub enum ProofCheckDepth {                                    
      131 -    Off,                                                      
      132 -    Full,                                                     
      133 -}                                                             
      134 -```                                                           
      130 +Verification is instead a **post-hoc assertion over recorded e
          +vidence**. A test runs the filter                             
      131 +with a ledger, then checks that every proof the run emitted re
          +-derives against the witness it was                           
      132 +emitted for. That is a stronger statement than an inline check
          +: it asserts no invalid proof was                             
      133 +ever produced, rather than that the pipeline declined to act o
          +n one.                                                        
      134  
      136 -`Off` performs no proof checking. A pass's `Reject` is taken a
          -t face value, while the proof is                              
      137 -still constructed, carried, and recorded. **This is the produc
          -tion default.**                                               
      135 +Two intermediate designs were considered and rejected, both fo
          +r the same reason.                                            
      136  
      139 -`Full` re-checks the proof's identity, witness, grammar/lexico
          -n revision, lexical origin, and cited                         
      140 -units, and re-derives the claim against the witness's own trac
          -e. It is the default for tests and                            
      141 -for `Shadow`.                                                 
      137 +An inline verifier gated by depth kept a checking branch in th
          +e pipeline that production would                              
      138 +never take, and left the verifier reachable from nothing — dea
          +d code in a production module,                                
      139 +described as a safety mechanism.                              
      140  
      143 -There is deliberately no middle tier. An envelope-only check w
          -as considered and rejected: the                               
      144 -pipeline hands a witness to a pass, the pass builds a proof fr
          -om that same witness, and an envelope                         
      145 -check then re-verifies that the proof matches the witness the 
          -pipeline just supplied. That is                               
      146 -first-party code checking itself, which is the same reasoning 
          -that moved claim checking out of                              
      141 +An envelope-only check — identity, witness, revisions, cited u
          +nits — looked nearly free, but the                            
      142 +pipeline hands a witness to a pass, the pass builds a proof fr
          +om that same witness, and the                                 
      143 +envelope then re-verifies the proof against the witness the pi
          +peline just supplied. That is                                 
      144 +first-party code checking itself, which is the reasoning that 
          +moved claim checking out of                                   
      145  production, applied one level further.
      146  
      147 +What follows is that verification code lives with the tests th
          +at use it, not beside the pipeline,                           
      148 +and that a pass's correctness is established before it ships r
          +ather than watched for at runtime.                            
      149 +                                                              
      150  **`Full` is not a production safety mechanism, and the contrac
           t does not pretend otherwise.** Every
      151  pass is first-party compiled code in this crate; no untrusted 
           party authors a proof, so there is no
      152  forgery threat model at runtime. Re-deriving a claim catches e
           xactly one bug class — a pass whose

● Agent "Fix death record pass attribution" finished · 4m 36s

● Attribution fix landed (bf6a11f) — RED showed the death record naming
  test.impersonated.v1 where the pass that actually ran was test.mislabeling.v1,
  exactly the defect. One-line fix, 32 + 16 green.

  And it found the residual half: rule_id and category have the same defect and 
  can't be fixed the same way. The pipeline has no independent source for them —
  admissible_proofs() is consulted only inside the verifier. Under post-hoc
  verification that becomes the only thing checking them, so it has to be an
  explicit requirement of the refactor rather than something inherited.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Agent(Post-hoc verification refactor)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Post-hoc refactor dispatched. Contract updated first (eb56257), so the agent
  implements against the committed decision rather than my description of it.

  Success criterion is blunt and checkable: a plain build with zero warnings. No
  #[allow(dead_code)] permitted — if something can't be removed, it gets named
  and justified.

  The requirement I made unmissable is the one the attribution fix exposed.
  WitnessDeath.pass_id is now trustworthy by construction, but rule_id and
  category still come straight off the proof, and with the inline verifier gone,
  post-hoc checking against admissible_proofs() is the only thing standing 
  between a pass and a death record stamped with a rule family it never 
  declared. Two of the three fields offline re-derivation starts from are
  otherwise unguarded anywhere. I also asked it to evaluate — not build —
  whether an undeclared (rule, category) could be made unconstructable at the
  type level, since prevention beats detection here.

  Three ledger-integrity residuals that agent surfaced are recorded against
  slice 11 rather than fixed now, because none of them can lose a valid parse —
  they only degrade the diagnostic:

  - BoundedDeathLedger caps events and deaths independently, so a stored death
  can cite an event ordinal the same ledger dropped.
  - After ordinal saturation every event carries u64::MAX, so post-saturation
  deaths share a non-unique key.
  - pass_ordinal saturates at u16::MAX, and WitnessDeath carries no
  pass_ordinal, so nothing cross-checks the two.

  Queue from here: 3d (running) → 3c (per-pass fixtures) → 4 (FilterIndex +
  structural passes, now carrying the panic guard, the no-wildcard rule, and the
  owned-index requirement).

✻ Sautéed for 2m 58s

❯ /goal finish fst-filter-hcrust chain                                          
  ⎿  Goal set: finish fst-filter-hcrust chain

● Goal acknowledged: finish the FST → filter → HC-rust chain. Continuing.

  3d is running in the main worktree. Slice 3c is mostly grammar authoring and
  touches disjoint files, so I'll run it in parallel in its own worktree — two
  concurrent, within the repo's build-slot cap.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Agent(Author per-pass conformance fixtures)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Two agents running. While they work, let me de-risk the critical path: the
  plan makes specific claims about existing code that slices 4–6 depend on, and
  the challenger already caught one false "verified" claim in its sibling
  document. Spot-checking those anchors now beats discovering they're wrong
  mid-slice.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● All anchors verified real, and two discrepancies worth catching before they
  bite:
● Both slices dispatched and running in parallel. While waiting I verified the
  plan's claims about existing code, since an agent wrote that plan and the
  challenger already caught one false "verified" claim in its sibling document.
  All anchors are real — resolve_pins (confirm.rs:132, already a pure function,
  so making it pub(crate) is trivial), MorphotacticIndex with next_state as the
  transition authority, confirm_batch_with_diagnostics. But two things the plan
  gets wrong:

  Slice 9 is under-specified in a way that would silently lose state. The plan
  names from_cached and into_parts. composite.rs actually has four: from_cached
  (925), from_cached_with_morpher (953), into_parts (982),
  into_parts_with_morpher (996). Carrying filter index/profile/revision through
  only the two named ones means the _with_morpher paths reset it silently —
  exactly the kind of thing that passes every test aimed at the documented entry
  points.

  Slice 5's "new pure function" already exists. morpheme_co_occurrence_rules_ok
  is at validity.rs:353, private, next to co_occurrence_rule_ok (337) and
  morpheme_co_occurrence_ok (370). The task is to expose and pin an existing
  function, not author one — and the distinction matters, because an agent told
  to "write a new pure function" will likely write a second implementation next
  to the first rather than notice the duplication.

  Both recorded against their tasks so the corrections travel with the work.

  Current state of the chain:

  ┌──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │          Slice           │                    Status                    │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 1–3                      │ landed (c3093db, 4b2c5fa, a7e46f5, a8fb35e)  │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 3b                       │ landed (ae722d2), then attribution fix       │
  │                          │ (bf6a11f)                                    │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 3d — post-hoc            │ running                                      │
  │ verification             │                                              │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 3c — per-pass fixtures   │ running, separate worktree                   │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 4–11                     │ queued                                       │
  └──────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────────────────────┘

  Slice 9 is where the chain literally closes — the filter wired between the FST
  proposer and HC-rust confirmation. Everything between here and there is
  building the passes that make it worth having.

✻ Sautéed for 2m 20s

● Agent "Post-hoc verification refactor" finished · 36m 50s

● Slice 3d landed: 65cf6a5, net −214 lines, pipeline.rs alone down 130,
  genuinely warning-free with no #[allow] anywhere, all 106 forgery cases
  preserved. The catalog check is keyed on record.emitting_pass — the ledger's
  attribution — never proof.pass_id, so a proof can't borrow another pass's
  declared rules. That closes the rule_id/category residual properly.

  It also reported the contract now contradicts itself in three places. Fixing
  that first — a self-contradicting governing doc is worse than none.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\specs\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-contract.md)
  ⎿  Added 2 lines, removed 3 lines
      119  proved no contradiction in the facts it owns, while `Defer` me
           ans it lacked sufficient certified
      120  facts.
      121  
      122 -A rejection proof contains a stable pass ID, rule ID, category
          -, and machine-checkable witness. An                           
      123 -invalid or unverifiable proof becomes `Defer`; it is recorded 
          -as a proof-verification failure and                           
      124 -never kills a witness.                                        
      122 +A rejection proof contains a stable pass ID, rule ID, category
          +, and machine-checkable witness. It                           
      123 +is evidence about a decision, not a precondition for it.      
      124  
      125  **The pipeline performs no verification.** A pass's `Reject` i
           s acted on directly; the proof is
      126  constructed, carried, and recorded as evidence. There is no ve
           rifier in the filter, no check

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\specs\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-contract.md)
  ⎿  Added 4 lines, removed 3 lines
      165  
      166  **Reproducibility is what replaces runtime checking, and it is
            therefore a requirement, not a
      167  convenience.** A recorded rejection names its pass, rule, cate
           gory, candidate identity, and
      168 -witness. That, plus the grammar, is enough to re-run the same 
          -word offline at `Full`, or with                               
      169 -filtering off entirely, and re-derive exactly what happened. P
          -aying to check every rejection is not                         
      170 -needed in order to explain any rejection later. This holds onl
          -y while filtering is deterministic,                           
      168 +witness. That, plus the grammar, is enough to re-run the same 
          +word offline — with filtering off, or                         
      169 +with post-hoc verification enabled — and re-derive exactly wha
          +t happened. Paying to check every                             
      170 +rejection is not needed in order to explain any rejection late
          +r. This holds only while filtering is                         
      171 +deterministic,                                                
      172  so determinism is pinned by test: the same passes, input, mode
           , and budget must produce identical
      173  retained sets, identical decisions, and an identical ledger, i
           ncluding event ordinals and pass
      174  order.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\specs\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-contract.md)
  ⎿  Added 3 lines, removed 3 lines
      194  
      195  The existing grammar model does not retain independent circumf
           ix-half identities after it compiles
      196  the cross-product into one affix allomorph. Finite-partner pas
           ses can be built and unit-tested against
      197 -the contract now, but they remain shadow-only until the future
          - generator emits explicit, stable                             
      198 -partner events whose provenance the proof verifier can validat
          -e. Unknown is never represented by a                          
      199 -sentinel `AllomorphId`.                                       
      197 +the contract now, but they belong to no enforced profile until
          + the future generator emits explicit,                         
      198 +stable partner events whose provenance post-hoc verification c
          +an check. Unknown is never represented                        
      199 +by a sentinel `AllomorphId`.                                  
      200  
      201  ## Multiple passes and death traces
      202  

  Read 1 file, ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\specs\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-contract.md)
  ⎿  Removed 1 line
      218      Kept,
      219      Deferred(DeferReason),
      220      Rejected(RejectionProof),
      221 -    ProofRejected(ProofVerificationError),                    
      221  }
      222  ```
      223  

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\specs\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-contract.md)
  ⎿  Added 2 lines, removed 2 lines
      256  ```
      257  
      258  - `Off` bypasses all passes.
      259 -- `Shadow` computes and verifies death decisions but sends eve
          -ry candidate to HC.                                           
      260 -- `Enforce` removes only candidates whose every witness has a 
          -verified rejection proof.                                     
      259 +- `Shadow` computes and records death decisions but sends ever
          +y candidate to HC.                                            
      260 +- `Enforce` removes only candidates every witness of which was
          + rejected with a recorded proof.                              
      261  
      262  Public profiles are certified pass bundles, not arbitrary unsa
           fe booleans:
      263  

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\specs\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-contract.md)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 1 line
      19  - **FST generator:** produces a recall-preserving set of candid
          ate proposals and symbolic witnesses.
      20  - **Candidate filter:** applies one or more sound rejection pas
          ses to those witnesses.
      21  - **HC confirmer:** performs the authoritative full analysis an
          d returns final analyses. “Confirmer”
      22 -  is preferred over “verifier” because the filter has a separat
         -e rejection-proof verifier.                                    
      22 +  is preferred over “verifier” because rejection proofs have th
         +eir own separate, test-only verifier.                          
      23  
      24  The pipeline is:
      25  

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Contract reconciled (ff8d103) — the two remaining "shadow-only" hits are
  correct usage, referring to profile membership rather than verification.

  The main worktree is free now, and slice 4 doesn't actually depend on 3c's
  fixtures — I'd sequenced them conservatively. Running both in parallel.

● Agent(Implement slice 4 structural passes)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Slice 3d accepted and the contract is now self-consistent again.

  The refactor is the largest simplification in the program so far: pipeline.rs
  down 130 net lines, ProofCheckDepth gone, the verifier field gone,
  PassOutcome::ProofRejected gone, and the build genuinely warning-free with no
  #[allow] anywhere. The verifier moved to test_support/proof.rs behind the
  feature gate — chosen over the test tree because both test binaries need it,
  and a mod-included copy would compile twice and generate per-target dead-code
  warnings.

  Two judgment calls it made that I'm endorsing:

  - It deleted two counters beyond my list — proof_verification_failures and
  proof_failures. With ProofRejected gone nothing can increment them, and a
  permanently-zero counter is exactly the misleading evidence this slice existed
  to remove. It offered to restore them; I'd rather they stay gone.
  - check_rule looks up the catalog by record.emitting_pass, not proof.pass_id —
  so a proof can't borrow another pass's declared rules even before the pass-id
  comparison runs. That's the subtlety the attribution fix exposed, handled
  correctly.

  Contract fixes committed (ff8d103): the "unverifiable proof becomes Defer"
  line, the stale ProofRejected variant, Shadow described as verifying, and one
  stale cross-reference in the definitions section.

  Now running in parallel:

  ┌─────────────────────┬───────────────────────────┬───────────────────────┐
  │        Slice        │         Worktree          │  What it establishes  │
  ├─────────────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────┤
  │ 3c — per-pass       │ candidate-filter-fixtures │ each filter earns its │
  │ fixtures            │                           │  weight on evidence   │
  ├─────────────────────┼───────────────────────────┼───────────────────────┤
  │ 4 — FilterIndex +   │ candidate-filter          │ the first real passes │
  │ structural passes   │                           │                       │
  └─────────────────────┴───────────────────────────┴───────────────────────┘

  Slice 4's brief carries something worth naming: with no runtime verification
  and no field feedback, the exhaustive model check is now the primary soundness
  instrument. So I required the reference predicate to be an obviously-correct
  second implementation rather than a paraphrase of the pass, and required
  accept/defer/reject counts in the assertion messages — otherwise a pass that
  never fires reads as green.

✻ Cooked for 2m 54s

❯ We are working the "exhasitive" part - if we can just get "a set of words per 
  filter" that is what I want right now.  I just want to know that each earns   
  it's keep, that the timing is not high (it shouldn't be) and that they        
  generally work as expected.  The full conformance grammars are coming and may 
  expose issues - we can fix those then.                                        
                                                                                
  Also, queue up some adversarial reviews for the filter plan and for the       
  filter implementations - can we make it simpler?  more robust?  Less filters? 
   Better O() construction? is it the right mechanism (FST, regex, hard-coded,  
  grammar specific / independant)?                                              

● Redirecting slice 4 first — it's currently building toward exhaustiveness you
  no longer want.
  ⎿  Message queued for delivery to ac3de2be65536624f at its next tool 
     round.
● 2 background agents launched (↓ to manage)
   ├ Adversarial review of filter architecture
   └ Adversarial review of filter implementation

● Slice 4 redirected — dropped the exhaustiveness apparatus, kept what "earns
  its keep" actually requires: accept/defer/reject counts per pass, an assertion
  that each pass rejects at least once, and a reported cost figure. A pass that
  never fires is the failure mode that matters, and it's invisible without
  those counts.

  Both adversarial reviews are running, read-only so they don't contend with the
  two building agents.

  Architecture review carries your five questions directly, with the mechanism
  question weighted heaviest. I framed that one to force a concrete answer
  rather than a diplomatic one — specifically whether constraints that are
  regular belong in the FST itself (if the proposer simply never proposes the
  candidate, no filter is needed), versus what the intermediate trace
  representation actually buys, versus regex-over-serialized-trace, hard-coded
  checks with no pass abstraction, and grammar-independent versus per-grammar
  compiled filters. I expect the honest answer to be a split, and asked for it
  to be concrete about which parts land where.

  On "fewer filters" I asked for a ranking on a specific basis: which passes
  will defer so often given the facts actually available that they're pure cost.
  That's the sharp version — the legacy adapter marks nearly everything
  Deferred, so several planned passes may be structurally unable to fire until
  the new generator exists, and paying for them meanwhile is waste.

  Implementation review is hunting the two things that actually matter: any path
  that loses a valid candidate, and assertions that cannot fail. The suite is
  ~150 tests and its credibility is the safety argument now, so I gave it the
  vacuous-assertion pattern already found here — asserting a list lacks a value
  after asserting the list is empty — and required it to state, for each suspect
  test, the mutation that would still pass. Stale comments are in scope too:
  several refactors moved verification out of the pipeline, and prose still
  asserting the old behavior is what the next reader will believe.

  Four agents running. I'll report each as it lands, verifying rather than
  relaying.

✻ Worked for 1m 57s

● Agent "Adversarial review of filter implementation" finished · 10m 53s

● Strong review. Verifying its top findings myself before acting.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● All three confirmed:

  - verify_all iterates records, but nothing ever passes more than one.
  refusal() structurally extracts a single error, so every call site passes 0 or
  1 record. Mutating the loop to .take(1) would pass all ~150 tests — and a
  corpus-scale verify_recorded would then check one proof and report that
  everything re-derives.
  - recorded_rejections reads ledger.events() and never consults 
  omitted_events() or is_summary_only(). Over a capped ledger it silently
  verifies a prefix and returns Ok(()). Both of these only bite at scale, which
  is exactly when they'd be trusted most.
  - root_position_is_possible has an untested -1 branch. Delete
  identity.root_index == -1 || and the suite still passes — after which a
  MalformedIdentity proof against a legitimate rootless candidate verifies,
  blessing a pass that deletes every rootless analysis.

  The headline is good news, though, and it's the part that matters most: the
  reviewer traced every return, ?, early exit, and arithmetic op in the
  production filtering path and found no path that loses a valid candidate. The
  only removal is under Enforce when every witness rejected. Budget exhaustion,
  ordinal overflow, Defer, Off, Shadow, empty pass list, and mid-candidate stop
  all retain. Zero unwrap/expect/panic!/unchecked arithmetic in the production
  module.

  So every defect is in the evidence layer — which after the post-hoc refactor
  is the entire safety argument. That's the right place to be strict.

  One correction to something I told you approvingly: I called the forgery
  coverage "9 categories × 9 corruptions = 81." The reviewer's deflation is fair
  — those 81 are 9 category-independent envelope branches repeated 9 times. The
  genuinely varying coverage is the 25 payload cases plus 9 envelope branches.
  Still real, but smaller than the number suggests.

❯ For instance, for circumfix or matching phonology, the FST should be able to  
  say "this is the Left hand side of circumfix A with phonology 2 and phonology 
  matches" and "This is the right hand side of circumfix A with phonology 3     
  and phonology matches" - that should be easy to have the FST transcribe, and  
  easy to check (a simple stack system with matching sides).  It just handles   
  circumfix, but does so really well and fast needing to know nothing of the    
  grammar because the record from the FST holds all the necessary info (even if 
  very condensed).  Does that make sense?  IS that specific example valid?      

● Yes, and the example is valid — for a stronger reason than the one you gave.
  Let me check one thing that bears directly on it.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Valid — and the justification is stronger than "easy to check."

  Why it's right: the reason to check afterwards rather than compose the
  constraint into the FST is state explosion. Enforcing circumfix agreement
  inside the automaton multiplies states by the (class × variant) combinations
  across the entire span between the two halves. That's the cross-product blowup
  this branch is named after, and it's what the contract means when it says the
  model "compiles the cross-product into one affix allomorph." Emitting labels
  and checking after keeps the FST small and makes the check O(n) over the
  trace. That's the canonical reason a filter beats an automaton constraint, and
  it's a much better argument than convenience.

  One refinement makes your "needs to know nothing of the grammar" claim 
  literally true. As stated, left emits "phonology 2" and right emits "phonology
  3" — and the filter must then know whether 2 and 3 are compatible. That's
  grammar knowledge, and it drags a lookup table back in. Instead, have the
  generator emit a canonical agreement key: both halves emit the same opaque
  token when they're compatible. The check collapses to key_left == key_right,
  with no table and no FilterIndex. Same information, but the compatibility
  decision is made where the grammar is already in hand.

  Slice 1 already built the carrier — LocalEvent::PartnerOpen(PartnerClassId) /
  PartnerClose(PartnerClassId) are in the model. So the trace side is ready; a
  stack keyed by class, matching on the agreement key, is a few dozen lines.

  What blocks it is upstream, not the filter. The grammar model collapses
  circumfix halves into a single cross-product allomorph before the FST is
  built, so the information is destroyed before anything could emit it. That's
  generator and model work — which is exactly why the contract keeps partner
  pairing out of every enforced profile, and why slice 3c is marking that
  fixture not-yet-provokable.

  The one thing worth checking before building it: foma's standard answer to
  non-local agreement is flag diacritics, which enforce exactly this class of
  constraint during traversal without the state explosion — that is their entire
  purpose. There's flag material already in gate.rs and precision.rs. So there
  are two explosion-free options, not one: flags enforce it in the FST and never
  propose the bad candidate; your design proposes it and rejects it cheaply.
  Which wins is empirical — flags cost traversal nondeterminism, filtering costs
  a proposal that dies. Worth deciding on evidence rather than by construction.

  I'm feeding this to the architecture reviewer now, since it's mid-flight on
  exactly this question.
  ⎿  Agent "a875ed5563b010cdf" was stopped (completed); resumed it in the 
     background with your message. You'll be notified when it finishes. 
     Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-johnm-Docume
     nts-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product\bd622822-
     b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\a875ed5563b010cdf.output

● Agent "Adversarial review of filter architecture" finished · 13m 42s

● This review is serious enough that I'm verifying its load-bearing claims
  before relaying any of it — if they hold, they change the program.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Stopping to report this rather than continuing — it's the most consequential
  thing found in this session, and it's about whether the program should
  continue in its current form.

  All three load-bearing claims verified in code.

  1. The ownership pass targets candidates that already cost nothing.
  confirm_batch_impl resolves pins first and continues past every None before
  any parse begins (confirm.rs:305-315). A candidate that fails pin resolution
  never reaches HC's expensive path today. Filtering it earlier saves the cost
  of a continue.

  2. The transition pass re-applies an authority already applied.
  ExploreMode::Pruned is documented in the source as "the production default,"
  and it consults MorphotacticIndex::next_state before every recursive step
  during emission (morphotactics.rs:66-80). The proposer is already
  morphotactically pruned. A filter pass consulting the same index afterwards is
  looking for candidates the proposer declined to generate.

  3. This repo already measured this exact idea and wrote NO-GO.
  docs/superpowers/specs/2026-07-16-candidate-prefilter-plan.md, status line:
  "Phase 0 DONE 2026-07-17 — NO-GO", census merged at 571b8a3. Its own words:

  ▎ Category (a) validity-gate rejections (the class this plan's Rust-side 
  ▎ predicate would target) are 1.5–8.1% (median ~3%) of Sena's 
  ▎ failing-candidate time, and ~2% of Indonesian's/Amharic's at comparable 
  ▎ scale — decisively under the plan's own ~10% go/no-go bar on every grammar.

  And the reason:

  ▎ Confirm cost = mrule/template unapply cascade, 88–99% of confirm time.

  The filter can only kill what it can prove impossible cheaply. The dominant
  cost is cascade dead-ends, which no cheap structural check predicts — you have
  to run the cascade to discover them. So the ceiling on this entire program,
  as designed, is roughly the 3% class that was already measured and rejected.

  It also answers the question you asked me twenty minutes ago. Same document:

  ▎ Three attempts to push precision INTO the network (flags/eliminate/compose) 
  ▎ all failed.

  Flag diacritics were tried for exactly this and didn't work. I raised them as
  unexplored prior art; they're explored and negative.

  What this doesn't kill. The reviewer identifies three things the trace
  genuinely enables that aren't in the 3% class: per-instance declination,
  runtime-overlay lexical material, and allomorph facts under a morpheme
  alphabet. Plus your circumfix design — which remains sound, but is generator
  work whose value is still unmeasured.

  What I'm doing meanwhile. I let slice 4 keep running rather than killing it,
  because its fire counts and timing are precisely the measurement that would
  confirm or refute this, and its FilterIndex, panic guard, and no-wildcard work
  are useful under any outcome. Stopping it would destroy the evidence that
  settles the argument.

  Two things need your decision, and I'd rather not guess:

● User answered Claude's questions:
  ⎿  · Given the July NO-GO measured this class at ~3% and the cascade at 
     88-99%, what happens to the filter program? → Re-measure before continuing
     · The plan document still directs agents to rebuild machinery that has been
     deleted. Slices 5-11 are subagent-driven from it. → Fix the plan now

● Both noted. Fixing the plan first, since a slice could be dispatched against
  stale instructions at any time.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Most stale references sit in Tasks 2–3, which are already built — rewriting
  history is churn. The dangerous ones are forward-looking, where a future agent
  would act on them. Fixing those and adding a supersession note.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\plans\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-first.md)
  ⎿  Added 29 lines
      12  
      13  ---
      14  
      15 +## Revision note — read before implementing any task           
      16 +                                                               
      17 +**The contract supersedes this plan wherever they disagree.** T
         +wo things changed after Tasks 1-3                              
      18 +were built, and this document's earlier task text still describ
         +es the superseded design.                                      
      19 +                                                               
      20 +**1. There is no verifier in the pipeline.** Production perform
         +s no proof checking of any kind.                               
      21 +Verification is a post-hoc assertion in test-only code: a run r
         +ecords its rejections, and a test                              
      22 +then checks that every recorded proof re-derives against the wi
         +tness it was emitted for.                                      
      23 +`ProofCheckDepth`, `PassOutcome::ProofRejected`, `DeferReason::
         +ProofVerificationFailed`, the                                  
      24 +`verifier` field, the allow-list seam, and the proof-verificati
         +on counters are all deleted. Task 2's                          
      25 +and Task 3's text below describes the machinery as originally b
         +uilt; it was replaced, and any                                 
      26 +snippet naming those types is history, not instruction.        
      27 +                                                               
      28 +**2. Exhaustiveness is not the near-term bar.** Model checks sh
         +ould be modest and cheap. What a pass                          
      29 +must show is that it earns its keep: accept/defer/reject counts
         + reported per pass, at least one real                          
      30 +rejection, and a cost figure. Full conformance grammars are com
         +ing and will expose the rest.                                  
      31 +                                                               
      32 +**A measurement gate now precedes Tasks 5-11.** `docs/superpowe
         +rs/specs/2026-07-16-candidate-prefilter-plan.md`               
      33 +records a **NO-GO** from 2026-07-17 (census merged `571b8a3`): 
         +the candidate class a cheap structural                         
      34 +pre-filter can prove impossible accounted for a median ~3% of f
         +ailing-candidate time, while the                               
      35 +mrule/template unapply cascade is 88-99% of confirm cost. Two o
         +f this plan's own structural passes                            
      36 +also target work the production path already avoids — `confirm_
         +batch_impl` skips pin-failing                                  
      37 +candidates before parsing, and `ExploreMode::Pruned` already co
         +nsults `MorphotacticIndex` before                              
      38 +every recursive emission step. Until a measurement shows this p
         +rogram beating that ~3% ceiling on a                           
      39 +real grammar, Tasks 5-11 are not authorized. Fire counts alone 
         +do not settle it: a pass can fire                              
      40 +often while saving nothing, so the measure is HC cascade work a
         +voided.                                                        
      41 +                                                               
      42 +---                                                            
      43 +                                                               
      44  ## Scope and sequencing
      45  
      46  This is one filter-only project. It does not build the new FST 
          generator and does not alter HC

● Agent "Adversarial review of filter architecture" finished · 19m 26s

● This directly contradicts what I told you, so I'm verifying it before
  relaying.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Verified, and it means I was wrong about the circumfix design. Two
  corrections, both mine:

  There is no span between halves, because there are no halves. emit.rs:377-379
  marks Role::CircumfixSuffix #[allow(dead_code)] with "Never produced by
  classify_affix." Circumfix rules route unconditionally to the
  structural-composite builder — emit.rs:1813 says "A discontinuous circumfix is
  unrepresentable by this emitter's concatenative model" — which synthesizes
  the whole word and emits one CompositeRec whose variants is the finished
  surface string. pa-batid-an is a single indivisible lexc entry. Agreement is
  enforced at grammar-compile time, so there is no mismatched candidate to 
  filter. My state-explosion justification described a span that doesn't exist.

  And "flags were tried and failed" was too broad. The three foma failures were
  matched-context flags inside ->; circumfix agreement is an inserted flag with
  left-context shape, which precision.rs:37-51 found sound because the
  conditioning material is already consumed. Flags are the more promising route
  here, not a closed door.

  The reviewer's result on your agreement key is worth reading twice: it's sound
  (over-acceptance can never lose an analysis, so soundness is free) but exact 
  only when the compatibility graph is a disjoint union of complete bipartite 
  blocks. With the full 4-tuple cross product the graph is complete bipartite —
  so the key is exact and the pass rejects zero candidates. It gains content
  only under pruning, which is exactly what destroys the biclique property.
  Minimal counterexample: (p1,s1),(p1,s2),(p2,s2),(p2,s3) — s2 forces
  key(p1)=key(p2), licensing the undeclared (p1,s3). The fix preserves zero
  grammar knowledge: emit a set of keys per half and check the intersection is
  non-empty, which is exact for any bipartite relation.

  So the real problem is entry count, not state count — N×M prefix/suffix
  allomorphs materialized at emit time. Emit-and-match doesn't touch it. Only
  declining to materialize the cross product (N+M) creates the need for an
  agreement mechanism at all, and that's emitter work with a left-context
  inserted flag, not a filter pass.

  And this is lap three: knob-teardown-plan.md records AllFlags costing 8.4x
  lexc and 4.5x compile on Sena to move precision 0.0504→0.0506 — nil — which
  made Strip permanent and handed precision work to a post-propose pre-filter,
  which was measured NO-GO the next day. Neither measurement has been retired.
● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\plans\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-first.md)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 1 line
      787  ```
      788  
      789  The DFA never directly deletes a candidate. It produces a stru
           ctured `RejectionProof`, and the
      790 -existing verifier decides whether enforcement is allowed. Unkn
          -own alphabet symbols transition to a                          
      790 +post-hoc verification checks that proof like any other. Unknow
          +n alphabet symbols transition to a                            
      791  non-rejecting defer state.
      792  
      793  - [ ] **Step 4: Run the DFA target and verify GREEN**

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\plans\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-first.md)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 1 line
      1146  run the Task 11 merged-tip gates once from the clean isolated
             integration worktree. A fresh
      1147  independent architecture reviewer then checks:
      1148  
      1149 -- every rejection path reaches `RejectionProofVerifier`;     
      1149 +- every recorded rejection re-derives under post-hoc verifica
           +tion;                                                        
      1150  - every uncertainty/budget/error path retains candidates;
      1151  - candidate death requires all witnesses to die;
      1152  - shadow and enforced reports cannot claim corpus coverage wh
            en private inputs are missing;

❯ I believe there are 10 or so filters that may be possible - it is really a    
  cost measurement - do it in the FST, do it in a filter, do it in HC.  In my   
  mind, SOME MAY be better in a filter, that would be a different architecture  
  than an FST.  Divvun already does this for some things (imperfectly) and that 
  is fine for our case - HC is perfect.  Filters make HC faster.                

● That's the right frame, and it sharpens the measurement better than what I
  just wrote into the plan. Let me fix it there.

  The July NO-GO isn't "filters don't work" — it's one data point about one
  placement for one class. The general question is per-constraint: FST, filter,
  or HC. And the three have genuinely different cost shapes:

  - FST — paid at compile time (entry count, state count) plus traversal; the
  candidate is never proposed.
  - Filter — paid per candidate proposed; the HC cascade is skipped.
  - HC — paid per candidate, full cascade, always correct.

  Which means a filter wins exactly when both hold: the constraint can't go into
  the FST cheaply, and what it kills would otherwise be expensive in HC. The
  July result is really a statement about the second condition — validity-gate
  rejections fail cheaply in HC, so predicting them saves little. The reviewer's
  ownership finding is the same shape at its limit: pin-failing candidates
  continue before any parse, so they cost ~zero and filtering them saves ~zero.

  So the measurement isn't "beat 3%." It's: attribute HC cascade time by failure
  reason, then ask which reasons a cheap check could predict. A constraint
  earns a filter only if its candidates are expensive to reject in HC.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\plans\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-first.md)
  ⎿  Added 30 lines, removed 9 lines
      29  must show is that it earns its keep: accept/defer/reject counts
           reported per pass, at least one real
      30  rejection, and a cost figure. Full conformance grammars are com
          ing and will expose the rest.
      31  
      32 -**A measurement gate now precedes Tasks 5-11.** `docs/superpowe
         -rs/specs/2026-07-16-candidate-prefilter-plan.md`               
      33 -records a **NO-GO** from 2026-07-17 (census merged `571b8a3`): 
         -the candidate class a cheap structural                         
      34 -pre-filter can prove impossible accounted for a median ~3% of f
         -ailing-candidate time, while the                               
      35 -mrule/template unapply cascade is 88-99% of confirm cost. Two o
         -f this plan's own structural passes                            
      36 -also target work the production path already avoids — `confirm_
         -batch_impl` skips pin-failing                                  
      37 -candidates before parsing, and `ExploreMode::Pruned` already co
         -nsults `MorphotacticIndex` before                              
      38 -every recursive emission step. Until a measurement shows this p
         -rogram beating that ~3% ceiling on a                           
      39 -real grammar, Tasks 5-11 are not authorized. Fire counts alone 
         -do not settle it: a pass can fire                              
      40 -often while saving nothing, so the measure is HC cascade work a
         -voided.                                                        
      32 +**A measurement gate now precedes Tasks 5-11, and it is a place
         +ment question, not a go/no-go on                               
      33 +filtering as such.** Every constraint can be enforced in one of
         + three places, with different cost                             
      34 +shapes:                                                        
      35  
      36 +- **In the FST** — paid once at compile time (entry count, stat
         +e count) plus traversal cost; the                              
      37 +  candidate is never proposed.                                 
      38 +- **In a filter** — paid per proposed candidate; the HC cascade
         + for that candidate is skipped.                                
      39 +- **In HC** — paid per candidate as full cascade cost, and alwa
         +ys correct.                                                    
      40 +                                                               
      41 +HC is the authority and is already correct, so a filter never b
         +uys correctness. It buys speed, and                            
      42 +only when BOTH conditions hold: the constraint cannot go into t
         +he FST cheaply, AND the candidates it                          
      43 +kills would otherwise be *expensive* to reject in HC.          
      44 +                                                               
      45 +The second condition is where the existing evidence bites.     
      46 +`docs/superpowers/specs/2026-07-16-candidate-prefilter-plan.md`
         + records a **NO-GO** from 2026-07-17                           
      47 +(census merged `571b8a3`): validity-gate rejections were a medi
         +an ~3% of failing-candidate time,                              
      48 +while the mrule/template unapply cascade is 88-99% of confirm c
         +ost — those candidates fail *cheaply*                          
      49 +in HC, so predicting them saves little. Two of this plan's own 
         +structural passes hit the same wall                            
      50 +harder: `confirm_batch_impl` skips pin-failing candidates befor
         +e any parse, and `ExploreMode::Pruned`                         
      51 +already consults `MorphotacticIndex` before every recursive emi
         +ssion step, so both target work the                            
      52 +production path already avoids.                                
      53 +                                                               
      54 +So the measurement is: **attribute HC cascade time by failure r
         +eason, then ask which reasons a cheap                          
      55 +check could predict.** A constraint earns a filter only when it
         +s candidates are expensive to reject.                          
      56 +The 2026-07-16 census harness (`rust/crates/pg-foma/examples/pr
         +efilter_census.rs`) already does this                          
      57 +for one class and is the thing to extend rather than rebuild.  
      58 +                                                               
      59 +Until that measurement identifies at least one constraint whose
         + candidates are both filter-predictable                        
      60 +and expensive in HC, Tasks 5-11 are not authorized. Fire counts
         + do not settle it: a pass can fire                             
      61 +constantly while saving nothing, which is precisely what the ow
         +nership pass would do.                                         
      62 +                                                               
      63  ---
      64  
      65  ## Scope and sequencing

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Plan committed (597f71c) with the placement framing, and slices 5–10 are now
  gated behind the census rather than sequencing off each other.

  The census extends prefilter_census.rs (already merged at 571b8a3) rather than
  rebuilding it, and its output is a placement table: per constraint, is it
  cheap in the FST, can a cheap post-propose check predict it, and how much
  cascade time do its candidates actually consume. That third column is the one
  nobody has measured for the constraints beyond validity gates — and it's the
  only column that can justify a filter.

  Two agents still running: slice 4 (FilterIndex, structural passes — I can see
  index.rs, passes/structural.rs, and the model-check test in its working tree)
  and slice 3c (fixtures). I'm letting both finish. Slice 4's FilterIndex, panic
  guard, and no-wildcard work survive any placement outcome, and its fire
  counts feed directly into the census. 3c's fixtures are the per-constraint
  word sets the census needs to attribute against.

  On your ~10 candidate filters: the census is what sorts them, but the
  architecture review already ranks several as unlikely to pay — ownership and
  malformed-identity fire but save nothing (their candidates already skip
  parsing), slot-order and structural-transition duplicate pruning the emitter
  already does. The ones it flags as genuinely reachable only through the trace
  are narrower: per-instance declination, runtime-overlay lexical material, and
  allomorph facts under a morpheme alphabet. Those are the three I'd point the
  census at first, since they're the ones no other placement can reach.

  Worth stating plainly: your Divvun framing is what makes this tractable.
  Because HC is authoritative, every filter is optional and any of them can be
  dropped on evidence without touching correctness — so the census can be
  ruthless. The risk isn't a wrong filter, it's ten filters that each cost more
  than they save.

✻ Crunched for 7m 42s

● Agent "Author per-pass conformance fixtures" finished · 1h 8m 26s

● Slice 3c landed (7f028c6, 36 files, +2942 on its own branch). One finding in
  it is more consequential than the fixtures — verifying it.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Confirmed, and it's a recall bug rather than a performance one.
  pg-grammar/src/compile/affixes.rs:60-67: if an entry's morph type is
  Circumfix, the compiler pushes a warning and returns None — entry skipped. The
  module header says it outright: "circumfix cross-products are not implemented
  (warned, no rule)."

  So on the FieldWorks path, circumfix entries produce no rule at all, and words
  requiring them simply don't analyze. That's honest (it warns) but it's
  missing coverage, not slow coverage — and it's exactly what your in-flight
  cover-circumfix-cross-product-and-infix-drop change targets, so it's known
  rather than newly discovered. Worth noting it sits underneath the filter
  question: there's no partner pass to build because on one path the halves are
  fused, and on the other the entry is dropped entirely.

  Slice 3c accepted. Eight authored fixtures plus the partner-pairing
  declaration, 5 harness tests green, and -Mode conformance-test -Scope all at
  1960/1960 passed.

  The oracle discipline is the best of any slice so far: 82 signatures driven
  from pg_parse::Morpher::parse_word, transcribed verbatim, then
  programmatically re-verified against the raw dump — 8/8 fixtures, 0 
  mismatches. And all 8 grammars are well-formed XML under a strict parser,
  which 18 of the 25 pre-existing staged fixtures are not.

  Three honest disclosures I'd have wanted and didn't have to ask for:

  - The Off/Enforce comparison is currently near-vacuous — zero passes exist, so
  both retain everything. It added non-vacuity assertions so it can't go green
  having filtered nothing, and said so rather than reporting five passing tests
  as coverage.
  - One isolation failure it couldn't resolve: structural-transition and
  slot-order overlap, because a MorphotacticIndex rich enough to model template
  slots would call a reversed-slot row a forbidden transition too. It separated
  them by construct instead — the transition fixture declares no AffixTemplate,
  the slot fixture declares no prefix — and recorded the limitation in both
  STAGING.md files.
  - -Scope local fails on a pre-existing gate, capability::tests::per_strategy_d
  erivation_is_identical_on_every_conformance_fixture, whose assertion machine >
  0 && staging > 0 can never hold when machine is 0 by construction. That's the
  exact limitation CLAUDE.md documents, unrelated to this work — and its
  failure message doubles as the evidence that the 25 pre-existing fixtures are
  still discovered.

  One gap worth tracking: pg_conformance_fixtures::discover walks only
  edge-cases and languages, so filter-passes/** isn't picked up by
  conformance_fixtures_gate — the new fixtures run through the slice's own
  harness only.

  Holding the merge until slice 4 lands, then rebasing 3c onto the tip and
  fast-forwarding, per the repo's linear-history rule. Slice 4 is the last thing
  running.

✻ Worked for 52s

● Agent "Implement slice 4 structural passes" finished · 42m 47s

● Slice 4 landed (29428f3) — 31 + 2 + 32 tests green, warning-free, no #[allow].
  And the agent did something worth noting: it independently confirmed the
  vacuity concern rather than defending its own work.

  ▎ OwnershipPass is literally a resolve_pins mirror, which is exactly the check
  ▎ whose candidates cost HC nothing.

  That's corroboration from the person who just built it, and it comes with the
  price side quantified: ~210–310 ns per pass evaluation. At Sena's measured
  51.5 candidates/word, five passes would cost roughly 64 µs/word — against a
  saving of approximately zero for the two passes that mirror work HC already
  skips.

  It also caught a recall risk I'd have missed: witness units are in morph 
  order, but rules apply in derivation order, and next_state permits template
  re-entry — so "slot indices strictly increase" is not certain from the
  authority. Rather than ship an ordering check it couldn't discharge, it
  narrowed the pass to site existence, which is order-free. That's the right
  instinct exactly.

  Merging the fixtures branch now.

  Rebased onto candidate-filter-first, ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Clean fast-forward — everything now on candidate-filter-first at 0127b69.

  This is the moment the anti-rot gate is supposed to fire: slice 4 landed real
  pass IDs, and 3c's fixtures are still marked awaiting-pass. That mechanism
  only matters if it actually triggers, so let me verify it does.
  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● A real merge break, and it's my sequencing error: I branched 3c off eb56257,
  which was before 3d deleted verified_filter. The rebase succeeded textually
  but the result doesn't compile. I warned 3c off ProofCheckDepth and filter_at
  but not this.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\tests\candidate_filter_fixture_weight.rs)
  ⎿  File must be read first

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\tests\candidate_filter_fixture_weight.rs)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 1 line
      3  use std::path::{Path, PathBuf};
      4  
      5  use pg_conformance_fixtures::{assert_matches_oracle, FixtureRef,
          Root, WordsYaml};
      6 -use pg_foma::candidate_filter::test_support::verified_filter;   
      6 +use pg_foma::candidate_filter::test_support::filter_of;         
      7  use pg_foma::candidate_filter::{
      8      CandidateFilter, CandidateFilterPass, CandidateWitness, Defe
         rredFactReason, FeatureSet,
      9      FilterBudget, FilterMode, LexicalOrigin, ProposalProducer, P
         roposalProvenance,

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● The gate fired exactly as designed:

  ▎ ownership: pass structural.ownership.v1 is now built, so this fixture is no 
  ▎ longer waiting — set status to "wired", set the measured min_fire_count, and
  ▎ let this gate enforce it

  Two independently-built slices met at merge and the mechanism caught the
  unwired fixture. That's the anti-rot check earning its place at the first
  opportunity it had.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Agent(Wire passes to fixtures and measure)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Fixtures merged and the tree is consolidated at 2f16309 — slices 1 through 4
  plus 3b/3c/3d, all on candidate-filter-first.

  I fixed one thing that was my error: 3c's harness called
  test_support::verified_filter, which 3d deleted. I branched the fixture work
  off a commit the refactor was about to invalidate, and warned that agent off
  ProofCheckDepth and filter_at but not this. The rebase merged textually and
  didn't compile. Committed the repair with that cause recorded, since the same
  mistake is easy to repeat with parallel worktrees.

  Now running the measurement that actually matters. Wiring the two built passes
  to their fixtures forces the first real earns-its-keep numbers, and I framed
  it so the answer can come back negative:

  - min_fire_count must be the measured count, not the authored estimate of 2
  and 3 — and a gap in either direction is a finding to investigate, not a
  number to record. Firing more than estimated would be worse than firing less,
  since it would mean rejecting words meant as controls.
  - Defer rates are the real question. The harness's adapt() marks role,
  allomorphs, slot, stratum, span, and local events all Deferred.
  structural.transition.v1 needs Known(Some(slot)) on both ends to build a proof
  at all — so it may be structurally unable to fire through this adapter. I
  told the agent that reporting that directly is the most useful outcome
  available, not a failed task.

  That connects straight to the census: a pass that defers on everything the
  legacy adapter supplies cannot pay for itself no matter how cheap it is, and
  we'd know that before building five more.

✻ Brewed for 3m 59s

❯ Are the candidates to HC checks really the same?  one candidate does not only 
  take HC 300 ns - it may take ms or more.  I want the claims actually wired    
  in - removing one candidate that is poorly constrained (but has enough to     
  reject it) may do a lot rather than having hc try 10,000 rule applicaitons to 
  verify the same thing.                                                        

● You're right, and the arithmetic makes it stark. At ~250 ns/evaluation, with
  Sena's 51.5 candidates/word and two passes, filtering costs ~25 µs/word.
  Avoiding a single 1 ms candidate pays for 4,000 evaluations — so it breaks
  even if the filter removes one expensive candidate per ~40 words. That's a low
  bar, and my aggregate framing hid it completely. Mean cost per candidate is
  the wrong statistic when the distribution is heavy-tailed, and cascade
  dead-ends guarantee it is.

  Let me separate what survives that correction from what doesn't.

  Survives: the ownership pass specifically. confirm_batch_impl resolves pins
  and continues past failures before any parse begins — that's a control-flow
  fact, not a distribution claim. Those candidates cost ~0 in HC no matter how
  the tail is shaped, so predicting them saves ~0. Same for ExploreMode::Pruned
  candidates, which are never proposed at all.

  Does not survive: my general "filter cost versus saving" reasoning for every
  other pass. Any pass that removes candidates which actually enter the cascade
  could pay for itself many times over on a single word, and no synthetic model
  check can tell us whether it does.

  Which means the honest measurement is the one you're asking for — wired in,
  against real grammars, correlating each would-be death against the HC time
  that candidate actually consumed. That's precisely what shadow mode does:
  compute the deaths, send everything to HC anyway, then attribute. Slice 9
  isn't blocked by the census; it's the instrument that produces it.

  Dispatching it now, in its own worktree so it doesn't collide with the fixture
  wiring still running.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Agent(Wire filter into HC as census instrument)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Slice 9 dispatched as the census instrument rather than as a plan step. Two
  things in its brief follow directly from your point:

  It must report the distribution, not a mean. Total, median, p90, max, and
  specifically the count of would-be-killed candidates whose HC cost was 
  effectively zero. That last number is what separates a pass that removes
  expensive candidates from one mirroring work HC already skips — and it's the
  only way the ownership null result and a genuine win look different in the
  data.

  It must attribute honestly or not at all. confirm_batch_impl groups candidates
  by root set before parsing, so per-candidate attribution may not be cleanly
  available. I told it to report the finest attribution it can actually achieve
  and say what that does and doesn't capture — explicitly not to restructure
  confirm_batch_impl in this slice, and never to fabricate a per-candidate
  figure from a group total. A measurement that overstates its own precision is
  worse than a coarse one that's honest about it.

  I also asked for a deterministic proxy alongside the wall clock — HC steps or
  rule applications — since the repo's own evidence rules make timing
  inadmissible except where time is the subject. Here it is the subject, but a
  reproducible counter is what anyone can re-check later.

  The recall alarm is wired in too: shadow_false_rejections correlates verified
  deaths against actual confirmation results, and a nonzero value means a pass
  is unsound. In shadow mode that's free to watch, because every candidate still
  goes to HC.

  Two agents running — fixture wiring in candidate-filter, shadow integration in
  candidate-filter-shadow. Between them they produce the first real evidence
  about whether any of this earns its keep: one says whether the built passes
  fire at all through the legacy adapter, the other says what their kills would
  have been worth.

✻ Churned for 1m 49s

● Agent "Wire passes to fixtures and measure" finished · 22m 30s

● A structural finding, and the design error is mine.

  The fixture harness feeds the filter analyses that HC already accepted.
  adapt() is fed morpher.parse_word(w).structured — the confirmed output. Since
  a sound filter may never reject what HC accepts, no sound pass can ever fire 
  in that harness, on any grammar. It's a logical impossibility, not a tuning
  problem, and I specified it in slice 3c's brief.

  So both measured fire counts are 0 against estimates of 2 and 3, and the gaps
  aren't the fixtures' fault. The rows authored to provoke rejections are
  expect_fail rows yielding zero analyses, so the impossible candidates never
  get proposed at all. There's no proposer in the loop.

  Three consequences, all stated plainly by the agent rather than papered over:

  - structural.transition.v1 cannot fire through the legacy adapter on any 
  grammar. It reads from.slot.known() before touching FilterIndex; the adapter
  defers slot, so every adjacent pair returns Undecidable and the pass defers.
  The 67% defer rate confirms it — and the 19 keeps are exactly the
  single-morpheme witnesses where windows(2) is empty.
  - Ownership's 0% defer rate is the opposite of decisiveness. All 57 witnesses
  are pin-resolvable, so it returns Keep at its first branch and never reaches
  any decision logic. Zero defers because zero decisions.
  - The Off/Enforce agreement is vacuous. It passes over all 57 analyses, but
  with 0 rejections it only shows the passes aren't lossy. The property worth
  having — a pass rejects and the comparison still holds — has not been
  demonstrated.

  And the honest kicker: min_fire_count: 0 makes the fire-count gate assert 0 >=
  0, which can never fail. The agent flagged that rather than banking the
  green.

  The population a filter can act on is candidates HC will reject — and only the
  FST proposer emits those. That's precisely what slice 9 wires, and why it's
  the only instrument that can close this. It's already running.

  Fixing the vacuous gate now rather than leaving it, since it's the exact
  failure mode I've been holding every other slice to.

● Agent(Close the vacuous fire-count gate)  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Two agents running: the gate fix in candidate-filter, shadow integration in
  candidate-filter-shadow.

  Where the chain actually stands, stated without varnish:

  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────┐
  │              Component              │               State               │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Contract, model, pipeline, ledger   │ Built, warning-free, ~150 tests   │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Post-hoc verification               │ Built, 106 forgery cases          │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ FilterIndex + 2 structural passes   │ Built, model-checked, ~250        │
  │                                     │ ns/eval                           │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 8 per-pass fixtures,                │ Built, 1960/1960 under -Scope all │
  │ oracle-verified                     │                                   │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Filter wired between FST and HC     │ In progress — slice 9             │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Evidence any pass earns its keep    │ None yet                          │
  └─────────────────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────┘

  That last row is the honest summary. Everything built so far is machinery
  whose value is still unmeasured, and the two attempts to measure it have both
  hit the same wall from different sides: the fixture harness can't produce
  candidates HC would reject, and the legacy adapter defers the facts the
  transition pass needs. Slice 9 fixes the first — the FST proposer emits
  exactly the population a filter can act on. Only a new generator fixes the
  second.

  Two structural facts now well-established that will shape whatever comes next:

  Passes split by what they need. Ownership-class passes need no trace facts but
  target candidates HC already skips before parsing. Transition/slot/span-class
  passes could target expensive candidates but need Known facts the current
  producer cannot supply. Neither group can pay for itself today, for opposite
  reasons — and that's a cleaner statement of the problem than "the filter is or
  isn't worth it."

  Your heavy-tail point is what keeps it open. If the FST proposer emits even a
  few candidates that cost HC milliseconds, and a pass can prove them impossible
  from facts the proposer already has, the economics work at 250 ns/eval. Slice
  9's distribution — median, p90, max, and the zero-cost count — is the number
  that decides it. Not a percentage.

✻ Cooked for 1m 31s

● Agent "Close the vacuous fire-count gate" finished · 13m 7s

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Found the same vacuity one level down: parked is counted but only printed —
  there's no assertion that any fixture is actually parked, so if both moved out
  the test would iterate zero fixtures and stay green. One line.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\tests\candidate_filter_fixture_weight.rs)
  ⎿  Error editing file

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\tests\candidate_filter_fixture_weight.rs)
  ⎿  Added 5 lines
      604              fixture.name, fixture.expectation.pass_id, fixture
           .expectation.min_fire_count
      605          );
      606      }
      607 +    assert!(                                                  
      608 +        parked > 0,                                           
      609 +        "no fixture is producer-blocked, so this test measured
          + nothing -- delete it once every \                            
      610 +         built pass has a producer that can present something 
          +it could reject"                                              
      611 +    );                                                        
      612      eprintln!("candidate_filter_fixture_weight: {parked} produ
           cer-blocked fixture(s) re-measured");
      613  }
      614  

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● The gate fix landed (8de3f5f), plus one follow-up of mine (b21e1f6), 6/6
  green.

  The agent's design here is better than what I asked for. I wanted a status
  that describes reality; it built one that self-invalidates. producer-blocked
  isn't an exemption — a_producer_blocked_fixture_still_reaches_nothing
  re-measures both passes on every build and fails the moment either reaches a 
  single rejection, forcing promotion to wired with a real floor. A parked
  fixture carries a live assertion rather than a waiver.

  It also falsified the anti-rot gate in both directions with real probes, not
  just the one I specified: a built pass with an awaiting-pass fixture fires,
  and an unbuilt pass mis-parked as producer-blocked fires with its own distinct
  message. Then reverted both probes.

  The closed reason set is exactly two members, and they name the two real
  blocks precisely:
  - producer-emits-only-hc-confirmed-analyses
  - adapter-defers-a-fact-the-pass-reads-first

  structural-transition carries both, because it's blocked twice over. Neither
  estimate was lowered — ownership keeps its floor of 2, transition its 3, to be
  enforced once a producer exists.

  And it flagged its own residual honestly:
  a_wired_fixture_reaches_its_declared_fire_count now iterates zero fixtures. My
  follow-up closed the mirror of that in the parked test, which counted what it
  measured but never asserted it measured anything — so moving both fixtures
  out would have left it green over an empty set. Same vacuity, one level down.

  Only slice 9 is still running. It's the one that matters: the FST proposer is
  the only source of candidates HC would reject, so it's the first opportunity
  in this entire program for a pass to fire at all — and its cost distribution
  is what decides whether any of this is worth keeping.

✻ Cooked for 2m 7s

❯ One thing we need to keep in mind is that this may enable us making a         
  smaller, simpler FST.  The gain may not only be reaslized as "makes HC        
  faster" but "enables us to shrink the FST without making inference (much)     
  slower"                                                                       

● That reframes the economics, and it specifically undoes part of my "vacuous"
  verdict — I should say which part.

  I argued StructuralTransitionPass duplicates work the emitter already does,
  because ExploreMode::Pruned consults MorphotacticIndex before every recursive
  step. That's only true if you keep the pruning. If the pass lets you turn
  pruning off, it isn't duplication — it's substitution, and the gain shows up
  as a smaller, faster-to-build FST rather than as HC time saved.

  And the lever for testing that already exists. ExploreMode::Flat — "skip the
  automaton entirely" — is kept in the source explicitly for A/B measurement,
  reachable via HC_PREEXPAND_FLAT=1. So the experiment is: build Flat, measure
  the FST size and compile-time drop plus the extra candidates, then check
  whether the filter absorbs those candidates for less than pruning cost.

  It also gives your circumfix design its real justification. The architecture
  review concluded emit-and-match doesn't help because "the cost is real but is
  entry count, not state count… only stopping the materialization (N+M instead 
  of N×M) creates the need for an agreement mechanism." It treated that as a
  reason not to build the filter. Under your framing it's the opposite: the
  filter is what makes stopping the materialization possible. N×M composite
  entries collapse to N+M, and the agreement check moves out of the grammar
  compile into a few dozen lines of stack matching.

  Recording this as a second measurement axis, because it's a design-level fact
  that needs to outlive this conversation.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\plans\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-first.md)
  ⎿  Added 29 lines, removed 4 lines
      51  already consults `MorphotacticIndex` before every recursive emi
          ssion step, so both target work the
      52  production path already avoids.
      53  
      54 -So the measurement is: **attribute HC cascade time by failure r
         -eason, then ask which reasons a cheap                          
      55 -check could predict.** A constraint earns a filter only when it
         -s candidates are expensive to reject.                          
      56 -The 2026-07-16 census harness (`rust/crates/pg-foma/examples/pr
         -efilter_census.rs`) already does this                          
      57 -for one class and is the thing to extend rather than rebuild.  
      54 +So the first measurement is: **attribute HC cascade time by fai
         +lure reason, then ask which reasons a                          
      55 +cheap check could predict.** A constraint earns a filter only w
         +hen its candidates are expensive to                            
      56 +reject. The 2026-07-16 census harness (`rust/crates/pg-foma/exa
         +mples/prefilter_census.rs`) already                            
      57 +does this for one class and is the thing to extend rather than 
         +rebuild.                                                       
      58  
      59 +Report the **distribution**, never a mean. Per-candidate HC cos
         +t is heavy-tailed: at roughly 250ns                            
      60 +per pass evaluation, avoiding one 1ms candidate pays for four t
         +housand evaluations, so an aggregate                           
      61 +percentage can hide a real win. Total, median, p90, max, and th
         +e count of would-be-killed candidates                          
      62 +whose HC cost was effectively zero — that last number is what d
         +istinguishes a pass that removes                               
      63 +expensive candidates from one mirroring work the confirmer alre
         +ady skips.                                                     
      64 +                                                               
      65 +**The second axis: a filter may pay by shrinking the FST, not b
         +y speeding up HC.** Precision in the                           
      66 +proposer is not free — it costs entry count, compile time, and 
         +memory. If a cheap filter absorbs the                          
      67 +over-proposals, the proposer can be built *less* precisely and 
         +get smaller. On that axis a pass that                          
      68 +merely duplicates an existing proposer check is not redundant; 
         +it is a candidate **replacement** for                          
      69 +it, and the gain appears as a smaller artifact rather than as c
         +onfirmation time saved.                                        
      70 +                                                               
      71 +Two concrete instances, both testable with machinery that alrea
         +dy exists:                                                     
      72 +                                                               
      73 +- `ExploreMode::Flat` (`HC_PREEXPAND_FLAT=1`) skips the morphot
         +actic automaton entirely and is kept                           
      74 +  in the source expressly for A/B measurement. Build Flat, meas
         +ure the size and compile-time drop                             
      75 +  and the extra candidates, and ask whether the filter absorbs 
         +them for less than pruning costs. If                           
      76 +  it does, `StructuralTransitionPass` replaces `ExploreMode::Pr
         +uned` rather than shadowing it.                                
      77 +- Circumfix allomorphs are materialized as an N×M cross product
         + at emit time. A partner-agreement                             
      78 +  check makes N+M viable. The agreement mechanism is only *need
         +ed* once materialization stops, which                          
      79 +  is exactly why it looks worthless while the cross product rem
         +ains.                                                          
      80 +                                                               
      81 +Neither instance is settled by the HC-time census alone; each n
         +eeds a build-two-ways comparison of                            
      82 +artifact size, compile time, candidate count, and the filter's 
         +own cost.                                                      
      83 +                                                               
      84  Until that measurement identifies at least one constraint whose
           candidates are both filter-predictable
      85  and expensive in HC, Tasks 5-11 are not authorized. Fire counts
           do not settle it: a pass can fire
      86  constantly while saving nothing, which is precisely what the ow
          nership pass would do.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Committed (4bc7f36). The census now has two axes rather than one.

  The distinction that matters: on axis 1 a pass must remove candidates that are
  expensive in HC. On axis 2 it only has to be cheaper than the proposer-side
  machinery it replaces — and that's a much easier bar, because it's competing
  against compile time and entry count rather than against a cascade that may
  never run.

  ExploreMode::Flat is the cleanest test available. It's already in the source,
  already kept for A/B, and it isolates exactly one precision mechanism. Build
  both ways, compare artifact size, compile time, and candidate count, then ask
  whether StructuralTransitionPass absorbs the extra candidates for less than
  pruning costs. That's a decisive experiment on a pass I'd written off as
  duplicative — and it needs no new machinery.

  Two things worth flagging about this axis before anyone gets optimistic:

  It only works for passes that can actually fire. StructuralTransitionPass
  currently defers unconditionally because it reads from.slot.known() and the
  adapter defers slot. Under Flat, does the proposer emit slot facts? If not,
  the pass can't absorb what Flat lets through, and the substitution fails on
  availability rather than on economics. That's the first thing the experiment
  should check.

  The July evidence cuts both ways here. AllFlags cost 8.4x lexc and 4.5x
  compile on Sena for a precision change of 0.0504 → 0.0506 — nil. That was
  measured going toward precision-in-the-FST, and it's the strongest existing
  evidence that FST-side precision is expensive. Which is encouraging for axis
  2: if precision in the network costs that much, removing it should give back
  real money. The open question is whether Flat's extra candidates are cheap for
  the filter and cheap for HC, or whether they're the pathological ones.

  Slice 9 is still the gate for axis 1 and still running. Axis 2 is a separate
  experiment I'd run after it lands, since it needs the filter wired to measure
  the absorption cost at all.

✻ Churned for 1m 38s

❯ Once we get the machinery in place, we can start testing A vs B - and should  
  have  nice test harness to iterate through many alternatives.  We also should 
  likely have a "filter selection" or conversely a "filter skip" parameter in   
  the pgpack, if the FST built compiles in the check that the filter would do   
  (if it is found better during the compile / report / health cycle).           

● Both of those are right, and the second is a real reversal with a real reason
  — worth being precise about why, since you ruled out pack config earlier.

  Let me check what A/B machinery already exists before proposing to build any.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Both pieces already exist, which changes what needs building.

  The A/B harness is mostly there. backend_space.rs has StageMeasurement,
  Quantiles, PilotSummary, summarize_pilot(measurements, seed), and
  deterministic_sample_indices(population, sample, seed) — deterministic
  sampling with quantile summarisation, which is exactly the shape the
  heavy-tail measurement needs and exactly what you don't want to hand-roll. It
  also has Characterization / SpaceCounts / FeasibleCount for enumerating an
  alternatives space with reconciliation. The iteration harness is a consumer of
  that, not a new thing.

  And the pack field has a home already. PackManifest.fst_health is a
  pg_foma::health::HealthReport, reused verbatim. That vocabulary has Metric,
  MetricValue, ValueProvenance, FindingCode, Remedy, and OverrideRecord — so a
  placement decision is a health finding with provenance, not a new manifest
  concept. The compile/report/health cycle you described is the thing that
  already writes it.

  On reversing the no-pack-config decision — the reason is sound, and it's worth
  naming precisely. What you're proposing isn't configuration in the sense we
  rejected. It's a record of a build decision: whether this FST compiled in the
  check. That is genuinely not derivable from the grammar at load time, because
  it's a property of how the artifact was built, not of what the grammar says.
  Deriving-from-grammar can't recover it even in principle.

  The safety argument is what makes it the right call, and it's unusually
  strong. Every possible value of a filter-skip list yields correct results:

  ┌──────────────┬──────────────┬──────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │  Field says  │ FST has the  │                 Outcome                  │
  │              │    check     │                                          │
  ├──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ skip         │ yes          │ correct, redundant work avoided          │
  ├──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ skip         │ no           │ filter doesn't run, HC rejects instead — │
  │              │              │  slower, still correct                   │
  ├──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ nothing      │ either       │ all filters run, possibly redundant —    │
  │              │              │ correct                                  │
  ├──────────────┼──────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ unknown      │ either       │ skip is skip — correct                   │
  │ filter id    │              │                                          │
  └──────────────┴──────────────┴──────────────────────────────────────────┘

  A corrupt, stale, or even adversarial value costs speed and nothing else.
  That's the exact opposite risk direction from the shipped-index idea we
  rejected, where a wrong value could make a filter reject something valid. Skip
  can only make a filter not run, and HC is authoritative. So this field is
  safe by construction in a way almost nothing else in a pack is — which is
  precisely why it's the one thing worth putting there.

  One caveat for when it's built: the skip list must be advisory, never a
  requirement. If a pack names a filter the runtime lacks, that's a no-op, not a
  load failure — it must never reach required_runtime_features, for the same
  reason as before.
● Recorded both. The queue after slice 9 lands:

  ┌─────┬──────────────────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────┐
  │     │               Work               │            Why now             │
  ├─────┼──────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 17  │ Cost-placement census, both axes │ The gate on slices 5–11        │
  ├─────┼──────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 21  │ A/B harness on backend_space     │ Flat vs Pruned is the first    │
  │     │ primitives                       │ real experiment                │
  ├─────┼──────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 20  │ Land the distribution plan with  │ Absorbs the challenger's       │
  │     │ the placement record             │ findings plus your reversal    │
  ├─────┼──────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 16  │ Evidence-layer fixes             │ Three verified vacuous         │
  │     │                                  │ assertions                     │
  ├─────┼──────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────┤
  │ 19  │ Re-point fixtures at the real    │ Unblocks the fixture program   │
  │     │ proposer                         │                                │
  └─────┴──────────────────────────────────┴────────────────────────────────┘

  On task 21 I've made one thing step one, because it's the cheapest
  falsification available: check whether the proposer emits Known slot facts 
  under Flat before measuring anything. If it doesn't, StructuralTransitionPass
  can't absorb what Flat lets through, and the substitution fails on fact 
  availability rather than on economics — which would be a five-minute answer to
  a question that otherwise costs a full build-two-ways comparison. Same
  failure mode we just hit with the fixture harness, so it's worth checking
  first this time rather than discovering it after the measurement.

  Slice 9 is still the one thing running, and it remains the gate: no pass has
  fired even once yet, in any harness, because nothing has yet presented one
  with a candidate HC would reject.

✻ Churned for 1m 40s

● Agent "Wire filter into HC as census instrument" finished · 1h 4m 48s

● The chain is wired. Verifying the landing and the one structural finding that
  changes the economics.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Verified — and this is the structural finding that most changes the economics.
  if doomed_members == chunk.members.len(): a chunk's HC steps count as
  removable only when every member would die. confirm_batch_impl fuses
  candidates into chunks by root set and parses the chunk, so killing some
  members doesn't avoid the parse.

  That raises the bar considerably. It isn't "kill expensive candidates" — it's
  "kill entire root-set groups." Nobody had articulated that, and it's now
  measured rather than assumed.

  Merging the chain into the main branch.

  Rebased onto candidate-filter-first, ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Clean fast-forward — the chain is complete at efc3813. FST proposer →
  candidate filter → HC-rust confirmation, wired through a single
  filter_then_confirm helper with cost attribution on the confirmation side.
  Full suite running in the background.

● The chain is closed. What it produced, and what it means:

  The instrument.
  analyzer.analyze_word_with_diagnostics(word).diagnostics.filter now carries a
  ShadowCostAttribution that partitions would-be-killed candidates into
  not_presented / never_grouped / sole_member / shared_member, and reports the
  distribution over exactly-attributable ones — median, p90, max, and
  exact_zero_cost. Raw per-chunk records are public via
  confirm_batch_attributed.

  It refuses to over-claim. A candidate sharing a chunk has no derivable share,
  and the agent declined to invent one — those land in would_die_shared_member
  and their chunk's cost in surviving_chunk_steps. It also noted that
  ParseOutcome::steps prices the restricted reparse and doesn't separate the
  mrule/template cascade from lexical lookup, so it cannot on its own confirm
  the 88–99% cascade figure. Both are the right calls.

  The null result is now mechanized rather than argued. Zero rejections through
  the legacy adapter, with the reason pinned by test: StructuralTransitionPass
  needs slot and stratum Known on both units of a pair and the adapter defers
  both, so it is structurally unable to reject on any grammar; OwnershipPass's
  only fact-free paths sit behind a pins_resolve failure the tag-decoding
  proposer never produces. 6 witnesses, 12 evaluations, 5 defers, 0 rejections —
  the passes really ran and really decided nothing.

  And the finding that most changes the economics. Enforcement only deletes work
  when an entire chunk dies. Killing some members of a root-set group still
  runs the parse. So the target isn't expensive candidates, it's expensive
  groups whose every member is provably impossible — a much narrower population
  than anything we'd been reasoning about.

  One caveat that governs all of it: this worktree has no private corpora, so
  every number so far is synthetic on a population of one. The single measurable
  data point — a would-die candidate costing HC zero steps, 18.6 µs of call
  setup and nothing else — reproduces the "fails cheaply" shape of the July
  NO-GO, but on a toy grammar it's a demonstration that the instrument works,
  not evidence about real grammars.

  Next is running it under -Mode corpus-test against the five grammars, which
  needs PANGLOSS_CORPUS_ROOT. I'll report the suite result when it finishes.

✻ Worked for 3h 40m 5s

❯ Yes, candidates are grouped - I am unsure whether it is better to filter pre  
  or post grouping.  I would assume: deduplicate first and then filter and then 
  group.                                                                        

● Good question, and the current code already answers half of it — let me check
  the other half rather than assume.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Your proposed order is already what's built. composite.rs:7 — "Pipeline:
  propose(word) UNION peel_candidates(word, propose), deduped by …" — and line
  50 calls them "the deduped candidates this word was proposed for, in the order
  confirmation will see them." So today it's propose → dedup → filter → group,
  exactly as you'd have it.

  But the chunk finding suggests a better order, and it falls out of two facts
  that fit together neatly.

  Grouping is nearly free, because pin resolution already produces the key.
  confirm_batch_impl resolves pins first — that's the continue-before-parse step
  — and the root set it computes is the grouping key. So the grouping is a
  by-product of work that already happens unconditionally.

  And a group with any survivor runs regardless. Verified: doomed_members == 
  chunk.members.len() is the only condition under which steps become removable.
  So in Enforce mode, once one member of a group survives the filter, filtering 
  the rest of that group is wasted work — the chunk parses either way.

  Which gives:

  propose → dedup → resolve pins → group → filter each group, stop at first
  survivor → confirm

  Cost goes from N candidates × P passes to roughly
  (members-until-first-survivor) summed over groups. For a group that survives,
  often one candidate. For a doomed group, all of them — but that's the case
  where you actually collect the saving.

  It also explains OwnershipPass cleanly: pin resolution rejects those
  candidates for free and is required for grouping anyway. You cannot beat free,
  which is why that pass measures zero rather than small.

  Three caveats before anyone builds it:

  - Early exit is Enforce-only. Shadow mode needs every candidate evaluated to
  attribute cost, and slice 10's Off-vs-Enforce comparison needs
  order-independent evidence. Two modes, two behaviours — worth keeping explicit
  rather than deriving from the mode, given how the depth knob went.
  - It makes the ledger order-dependent. Which candidates get evaluated now
  depends on group iteration order, and slice 9 already had to sort chunk
  membership because the loop iterates an FxHashMap. Determinism is pinned by
  test, so this would have to preserve it.
  - The saving is unmeasured and measurable now. Whether failures cluster in
  doomed groups or scatter across surviving ones is exactly what
  would_die_shared_member versus removable_chunks reports. That's a corpus
  question, and the instrument for it exists.

  I'd hold the reordering until the corpus census runs. If failures scatter
  across surviving groups, early exit saves most of the filter cost but the
  filter saves nothing anyway; if they cluster, both numbers matter. Same
  measurement decides both.

✻ Crunched for 1m 34s

※ recap: The goal was finishing the FST→filter→HC chain; it's now wired and merged at efc3813, with the filter measuring what it would save. No pass has fired yet on real data. Next: run the census under corpus-test against the five grammars. (disable recaps in /config)

● Background command "Run the full pg-foma suite on the merged chain" completed
(exit code 0)

● Suite passed. Getting the count.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● 960/960 green on the merged chain. That clears the fixture-rot failure the
  shadow agent hit — it was working from a base predating the producer-blocked
  status, and the merge resolved it.

  The goal is met: FST → filter → HC-rust is wired, tested end to end, and
  instrumented.

  Where it stands at efc3813:

  ┌───────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────────┐
  │                                   │                                      │
  ├───────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Commits on candidate-filter-first │ 17                                   │
  ├───────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ pg-foma suite                     │ 960 passed, 0 failed                 │
  ├───────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Plain build                       │ warning-free, no #[allow(dead_code)] │
  ├───────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Conformance -Scope all            │ 1960/1960                            │
  └───────────────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────────────┘

  What's real: the model, pipeline, ledger, post-hoc verification with 106
  forgery cases, FilterIndex, two structural passes, eight oracle-verified
  fixtures with a self-invalidating parked status, and the shadow wiring with
  cost attribution that refuses to invent a per-candidate share it cannot
  derive.

  What's still unproven, stated plainly: no pass has fired once, on any input,
  in any harness. Two of them structurally cannot through the legacy adapter —
  StructuralTransitionPass needs slot and stratum Known and gets neither;
  OwnershipPass's fact-free paths sit behind a pin failure the proposer never
  emits. That's now pinned by test rather than argued.

  The three findings that will decide whether this is worth continuing, all
  discovered by building it rather than by planning:

  1. Enforcement only deletes work when an entire root-set group dies. Killing
  some members of a chunk avoids nothing. That's a far narrower target than
  "expensive candidates."
  2. The July NO-GO applies — the class a cheap structural check can predict
  fails cheaply in HC anyway, and the one synthetic data point reproduced
  exactly that shape: zero HC steps, 18.6 µs of call setup.
  3. But your FST-shrinkage axis is untested and may reverse it. If a filter
  lets the proposer be built less precisely, a pass that duplicates a proposer
  check becomes a replacement for it, and ExploreMode::Flat already exists as
  the lever.

  The honest next step is one corpus run, not more building. The instrument
  needs PANGLOSS_CORPUS_ROOT pointed at the five grammars under -Mode 
  corpus-test, and it will report whether would-be-killed candidates cluster
  into removable groups or scatter across surviving ones. That single number
  decides slices 5–11, the reordering we just discussed, and whether the pgpack
  placement record has anything to record.

✔ Goal achieved (2h · 1 turn · 708.4k tokens) (ctrl+o to expand)

✻ Sautéed for 34s

❯ Run the corpuses - make sure you have good traces.  Try just 20 words or so   
  first - you will likely get good data to start with.  Then you can expand as  
  you revise the plans.                                                         
● Running the census. First, locating the corpora and checking what harness
  already exists — I'd rather extend prefilter_census.rs than write a new one.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● All five corpora are present in the main checkout. The filter worktree doesn't
  have them (gitignored, never copied), so this needs PANGLOSS_CORPUS_ROOT.
  Checking what harness scaffolding already exists.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Found the scaffolding — prefilter_census.rs (the July harness), plus
  backend_candidate_census.rs and deadend_census.rs to model on.

  But there's a problem with the census as I framed it: the structural passes
  provably kill nothing through the legacy adapter, so a shadow run would
  measure an empty set. The fix makes the measurement far more valuable —
  measure the ceiling instead of the current passes.

  In shadow mode every candidate still goes to HC, so we already learn which
  ones got zero confirmations. Those are exactly the candidates a perfect filter
  could have removed. Feeding that set through the chunk attribution answers
  the question that bounds the entire program: if an ideal filter existed, how 
  much HC work would actually disappear? Given that a chunk only becomes
  removable when its whole membership dies, that ceiling may be far below the
  ~95% candidate failure rate.

● Agent(Run the ceiling census on corpora)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Census running. Indonesian first, 20 words, then expand.

  The measurement is the ceiling, not the current passes — which makes it
  independent of anything we've built and far more decisive. The headline is one
  ratio:

  removable_steps / (removable_steps + surviving_chunk_steps)

  That's the fraction of confirmation work a perfect filter could delete. If
  it's small, no filter design helps and the program stops on evidence rather
  than on argument.

  I also asked for the gap between two numbers that sound alike and aren't:
  candidates with empty buckets (what an ideal filter could kill) versus chunks 
  that actually became removable (what that would delete). Sena's 5% candidate
  precision means ~95% of candidates fail — but if those failures scatter across
  chunks that each retain one survivor, the removable fraction is near zero.
  That gap is the whole question, and nobody has measured it.

  Plus the member-count distribution of removable chunks, because a chunk
  removable at size 1 is a much easier target than one where all eight members
  happened to fail — different filters, different difficulty.

  On safety: this repo has three recorded exhaustion events (97 GB, 90 GB, 118
  GB), all from probes invoked outside the managed path. So it runs through
  pg.ps1 -Mode run for the kernel-enforced job object, single-threaded, with a
  per-word timeout treated as a typed outcome rather than an empty result.
  Amharic and Aweti come last if at all, given their documented timeout hazards.

✻ Churned for 1m 57s

● Agent "Run the ceiling census on corpora" finished · 33m 58s

● Decisive result. Verifying the outstanding gap first — the agent couldn't run
  the suite because an unrelated dotnet process held 42 GB and tripped the
  low-memory gate.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Only 3.2 GB truly free, though that metric excludes standby cache — pg.ps1
  gates on "available," which counts it. Let me ask the tool that owns the gate.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● The census answers the question, and the answer is not uniform — which is
  itself the finding.

  The ceiling, per grammar

  ┌──────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────┬─────────────┐
  │       Grammar        │ Removable share of confirmation   │  By wall    │
  │                      │               steps               │    clock    │
  ├──────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┼─────────────┤
  │ Sena (100 words)     │ 93.6% (95,370/101,847)            │ 94.5%       │
  ├──────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┼─────────────┤
  │ Amharic (60 words)   │ 31.9%                             │ 3.7%        │
  ├──────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┼─────────────┤
  │ Indonesian (121      │ 15.1%                             │ 13.1%       │
  │ words)               │                                   │             │
  ├──────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┼─────────────┤
  │ Mbugwe, Aweti        │ no data — see below               │ —           │
  └──────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────┴─────────────┘

  Sena's 93.6% is real and large, and bit-identical across two independent runs
  while wall clock moved 2044→2610 ms — steps are the reproducible unit, as the
  repo's evidence rules assume.

  Indonesian's 15% is one word. 54 of its 68 removable steps come from
  mengamat-amati; without it, 4.8%. The other 14 removable chunks are 1 step
  each.

  Amharic's two numbers disagree 10x — 32% by steps, 3.7% by time — because its
  surviving chunks are where the time actually goes (2618 ms surviving vs 101 ms
  removable). Its steps figure badly overstates the ceiling. That divergence is
  a warning about trusting steps alone.

  The gap that matters

  Killable candidates are not deletable work:

  ┌────────────┬─────────────────────┬─────────────────────┬──────────────┐
  │            │ Candidates killable │ Chunks fully doomed │ Work deleted │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────┼─────────────────────┼──────────────┤
  │ Indonesian │ 30.2%               │ 12.7%               │ 15.1%        │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────┼─────────────────────┼──────────────┤
  │ Sena       │ 97.8%               │ 82.9%               │ 93.6%        │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────┼─────────────────────┼──────────────┤
  │ Amharic    │ 71.8%               │ 29.0%               │ 3.7% (wall)  │
  └────────────┴─────────────────────┴─────────────────────┴──────────────┘

  Counting killable candidates overstates achievable saving by 2.3x on 
  Indonesian and 19x on Amharic. Only Sena translates.

  The engineering problem this creates

  Removable-chunk member counts are opposite between grammars:

  - Indonesian: 80% singletons, median 1, max 3 — easy to kill, worth 1 step
  each.
  - Sena: median 8, p90 34, max 335 — where all the money is, and you must kill
  every member of a chunk to collect any of it.

  So a pass with 90% coverage on a 20-member Sena chunk deletes nothing. The
  grammar where filtering pays is the one where partial coverage is worthless.
  That's a much harder target than "reject more candidates," and it's the
  constraint any future pass has to be designed against.

  Two things not to over-read

  Mbugwe and Aweti produced zero candidates — the harness uses emit::emit, and
  those grammars need the templated/composite path. Their ceiling is unmeasured,
  not zero.

  Your 20-word suggestion didn't work as expected, through no fault of the plan:
  the Indonesian list is alphabetical, so the first 20 lines are all bare
  uninflected roots that every candidate confirms — zero denominator, no
  ceiling. Derived forms start around line 33. The agent expanded to 121 and
  reported the degenerate first run verbatim rather than quietly re-slicing,
  which is the right call.

  One outstanding verification

  The census committed production changes (ConfirmChunkCost.timed_out,
  shadow::attribute made public, chunk_is_removable extracted) that have not 
  been run against the 960-test suite. pg.ps1 refuses with exit 17: a dotnet
  process (pid 35768) is holding 44.12 GB, commit charge is at 98% of limit, and
  only 2.9 GB is available against the 8 GB reserve. That's not my process and
  I won't kill it or override the gate — it exists because this machine was
  taken to zero memory twice. The code has compiled cleanly six times through
  the managed release path; the suite run is pending machine headroom.

  Minor doc/code mismatch spotted: CLAUDE.md says gc is exempt from the memory
  gate "because it is the recovery action," but -Mode gc refused with exit 17
  too.

✻ Worked for 37m 27s

※ recap: The goal was wiring the FST → filter → HC-rust chain and measuring whether filtering pays; the chain is done and the census says Sena 93.6%, Indonesian 15%, Amharic 3.7%. Next: rerun the 960-test suite once a 44 GB dotnet process frees memory. (disable recaps in /config)

❯ Don't just look at percentages, look at time (or arcs-more deterministic).    
  Ind is already very fast, Sena still slow.  10 down to 8ms/word for HC +      
  5ms/word (for filtering) is fine (still very fast) while Sena is 100ms per    
  word (I believe) down to 7ms / word + 5ms filter time?  Great!  Also, getting 
  the p99's down is really important, even if the p50's go up a few ms.         

● Right — and the percentages actively mislead here. Let me convert to absolutes
  from the aggregates I have, then get the proper distribution.

  Sena: 101,847 steps over 100 words = ~1,018 steps/word. Removing doomed chunks
  leaves 6,477 → ~65 steps/word. That's a 15.7x reduction. Against your ~100
  ms/word estimate that lands near 6.4 ms/word — very close to the 7 ms you
  guessed.

  Indonesian: 451 steps over 121 words = 3.7 steps/word. A 15% cut removes ~0.6
  steps/word. There is nothing to win; it's already fast, exactly as you say.

  Amharic: 288 steps over 60 words = 4.8 steps/word, and the removable ones are
  the cheap ones (101 ms removable vs 2,618 ms surviving). Filtering would shave
  the fast cases and leave the slow ones.

  And your 5 ms filter estimate is probably 10–50x too high. Measured pass
  evaluation is ~250 ns. Even at Sena's 51.5 candidates/word with several passes
  and longer real traces, that's tens to hundreds of microseconds per word —
  call it 0.1–0.5 ms. Against ~100 ms/word, the filter is close to free, which
  makes the p50/p99 trade you describe strictly better than you framed it.

  That said, two things I genuinely don't have and shouldn't fake: per-word 
  distributions (the census reported per-chunk steps) and a meaningful p99 — 100
  words gives you one word at p99, which is noise.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Memory's clear — dotnet exited, 25.3 GB available. Dispatching the run that
  answers this properly.

● Agent(Per-word latency distribution census)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Dispatched, with p99 as the headline and the p50 delta reported alongside it —
  your trade stated as the measurement, not buried under a ratio.

  Three things I changed from the first census based on your framing:

  Word counts sized for the tail. Sena at 1000 words, not 100 — at 100 words p99
  is a single word, which is noise, and the tail is the whole question.
  Indonesian gets its full list (only 121 lines exist), Amharic 500 if it
  completes.

  Filter cost measured, not extrapolated. I quoted you ~250 ns/eval a moment
  ago, but that came from a synthetic model check over short traces and I
  shouldn't state it as a per-word figure. The run measures actual evaluations
  and elapsed per word over the same corpus, reported at p50 and p99. The passes
  will still reject nothing — they're structurally unable to fire through the
  legacy adapter — so this is purely a cost measurement, and I flagged that so
  the zeros aren't misread as a negative result.

  Compile time separated from per-word cost. Sena's 255k lexc lines dominate any
  wall-clock total; mixing that into a per-word figure would have made the
  earlier 18.2 s number meaningless.

  It also clears the outstanding verification first — the 960-test suite against
  38b1854's production changes, which the memory gate blocked. If that fails,
  it stops there rather than reporting census numbers from unverified code.

✻ Cogitated for 1m 39s

● Agent "Per-word latency distribution census" finished · 29m 57s

● Suite verification cleared: 960 passed, 0 failed against 38b1854's production
  changes.

  The census didn't run. A new dotnet process (pid 36628) appeared and grew to
  45.9 GB, taking free memory from 10 GB to 3.5 GB over ten minutes and tripping
  the exit-17 gate. The agent refused to override it and reported no numbers
  rather than partial ones — correct on both counts.

  The reporting code is built and committed (8b8d8bd) but has never been 
  executed, so its arithmetic and output format are unwitnessed.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● I'm blocked, and it needs your call rather than mine.

  C:\Program Files\dotnet\dotnet.exe, pid 36628, started 08:12:05, now at 48.1 
  GB working set / 48.2 GB committed. Machine-wide that leaves 3.5 GB of 63.7 GB
  available, against pg.ps1's 8 GB reserve — so every managed build and run
  refuses with exit 17.

  It's not a PanGloss process and not one of mine. I haven't touched it: the
  gate exists because this machine was taken to zero memory twice, and
  PANGLOSS_MIN_FREE_MEM_GB is exactly the override the docs warn against
  reaching for. It's also the second one — a 44 GB dotnet (pid 35768) held the
  same position earlier, exited, and this one started twenty minutes later and
  is still growing.

  If that's your C# machine build or a test run you want finished, I'll wait. If
  it's stuck, killing it frees the census immediately.

  What is settled while we wait:

  - 960/960 suite green at 38b1854 — ConfirmChunkCost.timed_out, public
  shadow::attribute, and extracted chunk_is_removable are verified.
  - The per-word reporting is written and committed (8b8d8bd):
  p50/p90/p99/max/mean/total for steps-per-word and confirm-ms-per-word, before
  and after an ideal filter, with a TAIL line giving p99 before→after and the
  p50 delta directly beneath. Filter cost is measured — both passes run in
  shadow over real candidates into a discarding sink — with witness-build cost
  separated from pass cost, and Sena's compile reported as a one-off rather than
  smeared across words.
  - It compiled clean and hygiene-clean, but has never executed, so treat its
  arithmetic as unwitnessed until it runs.

  The run order when memory frees up is Indonesian (cheapest, and the first real
  exercise of the new code) → Amharic → Sena last, since 255k lexc lines plus
  1000 words is the one at risk of the 600 s foreground limit.

  One loose end worth noting: at the time of the refusal, build slot 0 was held
  by pid 10164, the pwsh wrapper of the just-finished test run. It should exit
  on its own — but if a later run reports a slot held by a dead-looking holder,
  that's the pid to check before assuming the semaphore leaked.

✻ Cooked for 32m 25s
※ recap: We're building a candidate filter between the FST proposer and HermitCrab, and the last measurement showed an ideal filter could remove ~94% of Sena's confirmation work but almost none of Indonesian's. The per-word latency census is written but blocked by a 48 GB dotnet process; tell me if I can kill it. (disable recaps in /config)

❯ On the powershell (or whatever) script that runs that says "don't do it, we   
  don't have enough space" add a recommendation to try to cleanup stale         
  worktrees.  We can safely delete any that are over 3 days with no work and    
  have everything committed.  Not only in PanGloss but also in FieldWorks.      
  That should give us a good 10+GB.  Other ones, make a judgement call and ask  
  me if you think we should.                                                    

● Two things then: the message change, and actually doing the cleanup. Surveying
  first — I want per-worktree evidence before deleting anything.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Today is 2026-08-12, so ">3 days idle" means last commit on or before 08-09.
  That gives 38 clean + stale worktrees, and 10 that need a judgement call.
  Measuring the actual disk first, and locating FieldWorks.

  Ran 4 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● FieldWorks yields nothing — all four of its worktrees are from 08-10 to 08-12,
  so none is stale. Worth knowing before spending effort there.

  PanGloss is where the space is. The six largest clean + stale worktrees alone
  come to 13.0 GB:

  ┌─────────────────────────┬─────────┬─────────────┐
  │        Worktree         │  Size   │ Last commit │
  ├─────────────────────────┼─────────┼─────────────┤
  │ phase-c-grammar-gen     │ 4.39 GB │ 07-31       │
  ├─────────────────────────┼─────────┼─────────────┤
  │ agent-ab06cf14e1b579742 │ 2.76 GB │ 07-31       │
  ├─────────────────────────┼─────────┼─────────────┤
  │ crp-equivalence-gate    │ 2.68 GB │ 07-31       │
  ├─────────────────────────┼─────────┼─────────────┤
  │ crp-ci-clippy           │ 1.63 GB │ 08-01       │
  ├─────────────────────────┼─────────┼─────────────┤
  │ p6-aweti-morphotactics  │ 0.80 GB │ 07-31       │
  ├─────────────────────────┼─────────┼─────────────┤
  │ crp-crlf-goldens        │ 0.78 GB │ 08-01       │
  └─────────────────────────┴─────────┴─────────────┘

  Plus ~32 more small clean ones. Making the message change first.

  Read 2 files, ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Found a real bug while I was there. Line 433 says "gc/doctor are exempt by 
  construction — gc is the recovery action", and CLAUDE.md repeats it — but
  there is no exemption. The gate at 434 exits before gc dispatches at 502. So
  gc, the documented recovery action, refuses to run exactly when you need it.
  That's what I hit earlier.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Making all three changes.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\rust\tools\_common.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 43 lines
      1607      }
      1608  }
      1609  
      1610 +function Get-StaleWorktreeCandidates {                       
      1611 +    <#                                                       
      1612 +      .DESCRIPTION                                           
      1613 +      Worktrees whose disk is reclaimable: every change commi
           +tted, and no commit for -IdleDays.                           
      1614 +                                                             
      1615 +      Removing a worktree does not delete its branch, so comm
           +itted work survives and is recoverable                       
      1616 +      with a plain checkout. The only thing a removal can des
           +troy is uncommitted or untracked                             
      1617 +      content -- which is exactly why a worktree with ANY dir
           +ty or untracked path is never listed                         
      1618 +      here, however old it is. A judgement call on one of tho
           +se belongs to a human.                                       
      1619 +                                                             
      1620 +      Deliberately does not measure directory sizes: this run
           +s on a refusal path, and walking every                       
      1621 +      file of dozens of checkouts would add minutes to a mess
           +age whose whole purpose is to be read                        
      1622 +      quickly. Size varies mostly with leftover build output,
           + so the oldest are usually the largest.                      
      1623 +    #>                                                       
      1624 +    param(                                                   
      1625 +        [Parameter(Mandatory)][string]$RepoRoot,             
      1626 +        [int]$IdleDays = 3                                   
      1627 +    )                                                        
      1628 +    $found = @()                                             
      1629 +    $listing = & git -C $RepoRoot worktree list --porcelain 2
           +>$null                                                       
      1630 +    if ($LASTEXITCODE -ne 0) { return $found }               
      1631 +    $cutoff = (Get-Date).AddDays(-$IdleDays)                 
      1632 +    foreach ($line in $listing) {                            
      1633 +        if ($line -notmatch '^worktree (.+)$') { continue }  
      1634 +        $path = $Matches[1]                                  
      1635 +        if ((Resolve-Path -LiteralPath $path -ErrorAction Sil
           +entlyContinue).ProviderPath -eq (Resolve-Path -LiteralPath $R
           +epoRoot).ProviderPath) { continue }                          
      1636 +        $dirty = & git -C $path status --porcelain --untracke
           +d-files=all 2>$null                                          
      1637 +        if ($LASTEXITCODE -ne 0 -or $dirty) { continue }     
      1638 +        $stamp = & git -C $path log -1 --format=%cI 2>$null  
      1639 +        if ($LASTEXITCODE -ne 0 -or [string]::IsNullOrWhiteSp
           +ace($stamp)) { continue }                                    
      1640 +        $when = $null                                        
      1641 +        if (-not [datetime]::TryParse($stamp, [ref]$when)) { 
           +continue }                                                   
      1642 +        if ($when -ge $cutoff) { continue }                  
      1643 +        $found += [PSCustomObject]@{                         
      1644 +            Path     = $path                                 
      1645 +            Name     = Split-Path $path -Leaf                
      1646 +            Branch   = (& git -C $path rev-parse --abbrev-ref
           + HEAD 2>$null)                                               
      1647 +            IdleDays = [int]((Get-Date) - $when).TotalDays   
      1648 +        }                                                    
      1649 +    }                                                        
      1650 +    return @($found | Sort-Object IdleDays -Descending)      
      1651 +}                                                            
      1652 +                                                             
      1653  # --- Preflight record ---
      1654  
      1655  function Write-Preflight {

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\rust\tools\pg.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 12 lines
      427  
      428  if (-not $diskCheck.Ok) {
      429      Write-Host "[pg] $($diskCheck.Detail)" -ForegroundColor Re
           d
      430 +    $stale = @(Get-StaleWorktreeCandidates -RepoRoot $repoRoot
          +)                                                             
      431 +    if ($stale.Count -gt 0) {                                 
      432 +        Write-Host "[pg] $($stale.Count) worktree(s) look recl
          +aimable -- fully committed, and idle 3+ days:" -ForegroundColo
          +r Yellow                                                      
      433 +        foreach ($w in ($stale | Select-Object -First 8)) {   
      434 +            Write-Host "  $($w.IdleDays)d idle  $($w.Name)  [$
          +($w.Branch)]" -ForegroundColor Yellow                         
      435 +        }                                                     
      436 +        if ($stale.Count -gt 8) { Write-Host "  ... and $($sta
          +le.Count - 8) more" -ForegroundColor Yellow }                 
      437 +        Write-Host '[pg] remove one with: git worktree remove 
          +<path> -- the branch outlives the worktree, so committed work 
          +stays recoverable by checkout.' -ForegroundColor Yellow       
      438 +        Write-Host '[pg] a worktree holding ANY uncommitted or
          + untracked file is never listed above; decide those by hand.' 
          +-ForegroundColor Yellow                                       
      439 +    }                                                         
      440 +    Write-Host '[pg] also: pg.ps1 -Mode gc -Apply reclaims sta
          +le managed target directories this repository owns.' -Foregrou
          +ndColor Yellow                                                
      441 +    Write-Host '[pg] sibling repositories keep their own workt
          +rees; this list covers only this one.' -ForegroundColor DarkGr
          +ay                                                            
      442      exit $script:ExitCodeLowDisk
      443  }
      444  

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\rust\tools\pg.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 4 lines, removed 2 lines
      442      exit $script:ExitCodeLowDisk
      443  }
      444  
      445 -# The spawn gate; gc/doctor are exempt by construction -- gc i
          -s the recovery action, doctor only reports.                   
      446 -if (-not $memCheck.Ok) {                                      
      445 +# The spawn gate. `gc` and `doctor` are exempt because neither
          + spawns a build: gc IS the recovery                           
      446 +# action and refusing it here left the machine with no way out
          +, and doctor folds this same check                            
      447 +# into its own findings and exit code further down.           
      448 +if (-not $memCheck.Ok -and $Mode -notin @('gc', 'doctor')) {  
      449      Write-Host "[pg] $($memCheck.Detail)" -ForegroundColor Red
      450      $top = @(Get-TopMemoryConsumers -Top 5)
      451      if ($top.Count -gt 0) {

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

❯ when we remove a worktree, we should also cleanup the                         
  C:/cargo-targets/<worktree-name>.  How can this be automatic?                 

● The gc fix works — it just ran at 0.6 GB available where it previously
  refused. And it surfaced something bigger than the worktrees.

  The target directories dwarf the checkouts. crp-ci-clippy is 1.63 GB of
  worktree but 8.05 + 2.51 GB of target dirs. crp-round2-root-entry 6.52 GB,
  crp-ci-assess 6.37 GB, profiler-health 5.7 GB. And gc marks every one of them
  "live" solely because the worktree still exists — so removing the worktree is
  what unlocks reclaiming them. Your 10 GB estimate is low by an order of
  magnitude; this is likely 60–100 GB.

  To your question: git has no worktree-removal hook, so it can't be automatic
  inside git. The right place is the tool that created the pairing.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● gc already has the whole seam — Get-ManagedTargetDirs,
  Get-TargetClassification, Invoke-TargetGc, plus the ownership markers. So the
  automatic answer is a remove-worktree mode that mirrors new-worktree: the tool
  that creates the worktree/target-dir pairing is the one that should destroy
  it, calling the same reclamation gc uses rather than duplicating the logic. gc
  -Apply then stays the safety net for worktrees removed by hand — it already
  classifies those targets as disposable once the worktree is gone.

  Checking my edits are isolated before committing, since this checkout has 34
  of your dirty files.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Verified clean — exactly three hunks, all mine, no pre-existing changes in
  those files.

  Your main checkout has 34 dirty files, so I won't commit there or switch its
  branch. Moving my tooling edits to a dedicated worktree and restoring main.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

❯ Keep fixing the hard drive issues - but it was .net that caused the RAM       
  issue.  The other agent is fixign that.                                       

● Good — I'll stay on disk and leave RAM to the other agent.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)
● Main restored — only your corpus-manifest.json remains dirty there. Committing
  the tooling change in its own worktree.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● My bug — TryParse needs a typed [ref]. Good that I ran it rather than shipping
  it.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\tooling-disk-recovery\rust
        \tools\_common.ps1)
  ⎿  File must be read first

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\tooling-disk-recovery\rust
        \tools\_common.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 1 line
      1638          $stamp = & git -C $path log -1 --format=%cI 2>$null
      1639          if ($LASTEXITCODE -ne 0 -or [string]::IsNullOrWhiteSp
            ace($stamp)) { continue }
      1640          $when = $null
      1641 -        if (-not [datetime]::TryParse($stamp, [ref]$when)) { 
           -continue }                                                   
      1641 +        try { $when = [datetime]::Parse($stamp) } catch { con
           +tinue }                                                      
      1642          if ($when -ge $cutoff) { continue }
      1643          $found += [PSCustomObject]@{
      1644              Path     = $path

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● 38 reclaimable, 9–12 days idle, every one fully committed. Matches my manual
  survey exactly. Removing them, then letting gc reclaim the target dirs that
  were only "live" because these existed.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● 11 removed, +8.2 GB. 27 refused — I need the actual reason rather than
  guessing.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Not dirtiness — a git limitation: "working trees containing submodules cannot 
  be moved or removed." Those 27 had the machine submodule auto-initialized by
  new-worktree; the 11 that succeeded didn't. Testing the deinit-first path on
  one before batching.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Deinit cleared the submodule but git still refuses — once registered, it
  blocks removal outright. The standard workaround is to delete the directory
  and prune, which is safe here: every one is verified clean, and branches
  survive independently.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● All 38 gone, C: 33.6 → 46.3 GB. Now the larger prize — those target dirs were
  classified "live" only because their worktrees existed.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● 113 GB reclaimed. C: 33.6 → 65.6 GB (+32), G: 525 → 607 GB (+81.5), 39 target
  directories removed. C: is back above the 50 GB SSD reserve, so builds return
  to the fast cache root. It also killed two orphaned find.exe scans that had
  burned 1009 s and 514 s of CPU writing to dead pipes — precisely the hazard
  CLAUDE.md documents.

  But the removal exposed that the advice I just committed is wrong. git 
  worktree remove refuses on any worktree with an initialized submodule, and
  new-worktree auto-initializes machine — so it fails for essentially every
  worktree this tool creates. That makes your automation question load-bearing
  rather than convenience.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\tooling-disk-recovery\rust
        \tools\pg.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 3 lines, removed 1 line
      434              Write-Host "  $($w.IdleDays)d idle  $($w.Name)  [$
           ($w.Branch)]" -ForegroundColor Yellow
      435          }
      436          if ($stale.Count -gt 8) { Write-Host "  ... and $($sta
           le.Count - 8) more" -ForegroundColor Yellow }
      437 -        Write-Host '[pg] remove one with: git worktree remove 
          -<path> -- the branch outlives the worktree, so committed work 
          -stays recoverable by checkout.' -ForegroundColor Yellow       
      437 +        Write-Host '[pg] remove one with: pg.ps1 -Mode remove-
          +worktree -Path <path> -- it also reclaims that worktree''s tar
          +get dirs, which hold far more than the checkout does.' -Foregr
          +oundColor Yellow                                              
      438 +        Write-Host '[pg] NOT `git worktree remove`: it refuses
          + outright on a worktree holding a submodule, and new-worktree 
          +initializes `machine` in every one it creates.' -ForegroundCol
          +or Yellow                                                     
      439 +        Write-Host '[pg] the branch outlives the worktree eith
          +er way, so committed work stays recoverable by checkout.' -For
          +egroundColor Yellow                                           
      440          Write-Host '[pg] a worktree holding ANY uncommitted or
            untracked file is never listed above; decide those by hand.' 
           -ForegroundColor Yellow
      441      }
      442      Write-Host '[pg] also: pg.ps1 -Mode gc -Apply reclaims sta
           le managed target directories this repository owns.' -Foregrou
           ndColor Yellow

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\tooling-disk-recovery\rust
        \tools\pg.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 1 line
      128  [CmdletBinding(PositionalBinding = $false)]
      129  param(
      130      [Parameter(Mandatory, Position = 0)]
      131 -    [ValidateSet('build', 'test', 'corpus-test', 'conformance-
          -test', 'release', 'doc', 'doctor', 'gc', 'run', 'new-worktree'
          -)]                                                            
      131 +    [ValidateSet('build', 'test', 'corpus-test', 'conformance-
          +test', 'release', 'doc', 'doctor', 'gc', 'run', 'new-worktree'
          +, 'remove-worktree')]                                         
      132      [string]$Mode,
      133      # conformance-test only and MANDATORY there; no default by
            design (see CLAUDE.md).
      134      [ValidateSet('local', 'all')][string]$Scope = '',

● Now the mode itself. Reading the target-classification seam so I reuse gc's
  ownership logic rather than duplicating it.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

❯ Can we make find not search our build directories?  And make the scripts run  
  to clean up worktrees auto-do all this work?                                  

● Both are worth doing, and (1) has a wrinkle: those find scans were find / 
  -iname ... from the filesystem root, and the build dirs live outside the repo
  (C:\cargo-targets, G:\cargo-build-cache), so no ignore file would have helped
  — find honours none anyway. The fix that matches repo precedent is a
  PreToolUse hook like block-bare-cargo.py that refuses a root-anchored find and
  points at rg --files / git ls-files.

  Committing my in-progress edits, then handing the rest off with the design
  settled.
  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Agent(Automate worktree reclamation)
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● 113 GB reclaimed, and the automation is being built on the design that emerged
  from doing it by hand.

  ┌─────┬──────────┬──────────┐
  │     │  Before  │  After   │
  ├─────┼──────────┼──────────┤
  │ C:  │ 33.6 GB  │ 65.6 GB  │
  ├─────┼──────────┼──────────┤
  │ G:  │ 525.4 GB │ 606.9 GB │
  └─────┴──────────┴──────────┘

  38 stale worktrees and 39 target directories removed, plus two orphaned find
  scans killed after burning 1009 s and 514 s of CPU. C: is back over the 50 GB
  SSD reserve, so builds return to the fast cache root.

  Three jobs dispatched, each with the constraint that made the manual pass
  work:

  remove-worktree mode — deletes the directory and prunes, because git worktree 
  remove is simply unusable here (submodules), and then reclaims only that 
  slug's disposable target dirs via gc's existing classification rather than a
  copy of it. Refuses outright on any uncommitted or untracked file, with no
  -Force — committed work survives via the branch, uncommitted work doesn't, and
  that call is yours.

  A gc switch so one command does everything, dry-run by default like the rest
  of gc, routing through the same removal path.

  A find hook on the block-bare-cargo.py pattern. Worth being explicit about why
  ignore files can't solve this: find honours none of them, and
  C:\cargo-targets / G:\cargo-build-cache sit outside the repo anyway — so the
  refusal message says that, to stop the next person trying.

  Two corrections I made to my own work along the way, both caught by running
  it: Get-StaleWorktreeCandidates threw on a TryParse overload that doesn't
  exist for an untyped [ref], and my first version of the disk message advised
  git worktree remove, which fails on essentially every worktree this tooling
  creates.

  The filter census is still blocked behind the .NET memory issue your other
  agent is on — the reporting code is committed but unexecuted, so those numbers
  remain unmeasured rather than partial.

✻ Sautéed for 20m 1s

● Agent "Automate worktree reclamation" failed: Agent terminated early due to an
API error: You've hit your session limit · resets 9:50am (America/New_York)
  ⎿  You've hit your session limit · resets 9:50am (America/New_York)
     /usage-credits to request more usage from your admin.

✻ Baked for 25m 2s

❯ keep going                                                                    

● Agent hit the session limit mid-edit. Checking what it left behind before
  continuing myself.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● 163 lines added to _common.ps1. Reading what it got done.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Three functions completed and structurally closed. Verifying
  Remove-ManagedWorktree before building on it.

  Read 1 file, ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Function is complete and its dependencies all exist. Exercising it — refusal
  paths plus a dry run, nothing destructive.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● All four behave correctly — including refusing your circumfix-cross-product
  worktree on its 51 dirty paths. Committing, then wiring the mode.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\tooling-disk-recovery\rust
        \tools\pg.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 29 lines
      240      exit 0
      241  }
      242  
      243 +# Placed before the disk/memory gates deliberately: this mode 
          +IS the disk recovery, so gating it on                         
      244 +# free disk would refuse the one command that creates some.   
      245 +if ($Mode -eq 'remove-worktree') {                            
      246 +    if (-not $Path) { Write-Host '[pg] remove-worktree require
          +s -Path' -ForegroundColor Red; exit 2 }                       
      247 +    $removal = Remove-ManagedWorktree -RepoRoot $repoRoot -Pat
          +h $Path -Apply:$Apply                                         
      248 +    if (-not $removal.Ok) {                                   
      249 +        Write-Host "[pg] refusing to remove this worktree ($($
          +removal.Refusal)): $($removal.Detail)" -ForegroundColor Red   
      250 +        if ($removal.Refusal -eq 'dirty') {                   
      251 +            Write-Host '[pg] committed work would survive remo
          +val because the branch outlives the worktree; uncommitted work
          + would not, so this one is yours to decide.' -ForegroundColor 
          +Yellow                                                        
      252 +            foreach ($p in ($removal.DirtyPaths | Select-Objec
          +t -First 10)) { Write-Host "  $p" -ForegroundColor Yellow }   
      253 +            if ($removal.DirtyPaths.Count -gt 10) { Write-Host
          + "  ... and $($removal.DirtyPaths.Count - 10) more" -Foregroun
          +dColor Yellow }                                               
      254 +        }                                                     
      255 +        exit 2                                                
      256 +    }                                                         
      257 +    if (-not $Apply) {                                        
      258 +        Write-Host "[pg] $($removal.Detail)" -ForegroundColor 
          +Cyan                                                          
      259 +        foreach ($t in $removal.Targets) { Write-Host "  would
          + free $($t.SizeGB)GB  $($t.Path)" -ForegroundColor Cyan }     
      260 +        Write-Host '[pg] dry run -- pass -Apply to actually re
          +move it.' -ForegroundColor DarkGray                           
      261 +        exit 0                                                
      262 +    }                                                         
      263 +    Write-Host "[pg] removed worktree $($removal.Path) (branch
          + $($removal.Branch) is untouched and still checkoutable)" -For
          +egroundColor Green                                            
      264 +    foreach ($t in $removal.TargetsRemoved) { Write-Host "  fr
          +eed $($t.SizeGB)GB  $($t.Path)" -ForegroundColor Green }      
      265 +    if ($removal.TargetsRemoved.Count -lt $removal.Targets.Cou
          +nt) {                                                         
      266 +        Write-Host "[pg] $($removal.Targets.Count - $removal.T
          +argetsRemoved.Count) target dir(s) were left in place: $($remo
          +val.TargetSkipReason)" -ForegroundColor Yellow                
      267 +    }                                                         
      268 +    if (-not $removal.Pruned) { Write-Host '[pg] `git worktree
          + prune` did not report success -- run it by hand.' -Foreground
          +Color Yellow }                                                
      269 +    exit 0                                                    
      270 +}                                                             
      271 +                                                              
      272  if ($Mode -eq 'run') {
      273      # Fail fast on usage errors before the expensive preflight
            machinery below runs; the -Exe existence check stays here sin
           ce it touches the filesystem.
      274      $runTargetCheck = Resolve-RunTarget -Example $Example -Bin
            $Bin -Exe $Exe

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Mode works end to end. Committing, then the one-command version.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\tooling-disk-recovery\rust
        \tools\pg.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 4 lines
      161      [switch]$NoSccache,
      162      [ValidateSet('strict', 'development', 'off')][string]$Base
           Mode = 'development',
      163      [switch]$Apply,
      164 +    # gc only: also reclaim worktrees that are fully committed
          + and idle this many days. 0 = leave                           
      165 +    # worktrees alone, which is the default because removing o
          +ne is a bigger step than deleting a                           
      166 +    # rebuildable target dir.                                 
      167 +    [int]$StaleWorktreeDays = 0,                              
      168      [Parameter(ValueFromRemainingArguments = $true)][string[]]
           $ExtraArgs
      169  )
      170  

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\tooling-disk-recovery\rust
        \tools\pg.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 16 lines
      555      # Separate sweep: reaping a compiler can destroy work anot
           her worktree awaits; reaping a scanner cannot.
      556      Remove-OrphanedScanProcesses -WhatIfOnly:(-not $Apply) -Sn
           apshot $procSnapshot
      557  
      558 +    # Worktrees first, because a target dir stays classified `
          +live` while its worktree is registered:                       
      559 +    # sweeping targets before removing worktrees would report 
          +as untouchable the very dirs this frees.                      
      560 +    if ($StaleWorktreeDays -gt 0) {                           
      561 +        $stale = @(Get-StaleWorktreeCandidates -RepoRoot $repo
          +Root -IdleDays $StaleWorktreeDays)                            
      562 +        Write-Host "[gc] $($stale.Count) worktree(s) fully com
          +mitted and idle $StaleWorktreeDays+ days" -ForegroundColor Cya
          +n                                                             
      563 +        foreach ($w in $stale) {                              
      564 +            $r = Remove-ManagedWorktree -RepoRoot $repoRoot -P
          +ath $w.Path -Apply:$Apply -RepositoryId $repoId -BusyProcesses
          + @(Get-LiveBuildProcesses)                                    
      565 +            if (-not $r.Ok) {                                 
      566 +                Write-Host "[gc] skipped $($w.Name) ($($r.Refu
          +sal)): $($r.Detail)" -ForegroundColor Yellow                  
      567 +                continue                                      
      568 +            }                                                 
      569 +            $verb = if ($Apply) { 'removed' } else { 'would re
          +move' }                                                       
      570 +            Write-Host "[gc] $verb worktree $($w.Name) [$($w.B
          +ranch)], $($w.IdleDays)d idle -- $($r.TargetsFreedGB)GB of tar
          +get dirs" -ForegroundColor Yellow                             
      571 +        }                                                     
      572 +    }                                                         
      573 +                                                              
      574      $classification = Get-TargetClassification -RepositoryId $
           repoId
      575      foreach ($c in ($classification | Sort-Object Class, Path)
           ) {
      576          $color = switch ($c.Class) {

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

❯ after finishing up the RAM / SSD fixes and committing, them, get back to the  
  FST filter - where are we now?                                                

● Both verified: with -StaleWorktreeDays 3 it reports the count and deletes
  nothing; plain gc has zero occurrences of the worktree line, so existing
  behaviour is untouched.

  Comment hygiene went from 1 to 4 violations — mine. The cap is one line for
  implementation comments.
● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\tooling-disk-recovery\rust
        \tools\pg.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 3 lines
      161      [switch]$NoSccache,
      162      [ValidateSet('strict', 'development', 'off')][string]$Base
           Mode = 'development',
      163      [switch]$Apply,
      164 -    # gc only: also reclaim worktrees that are fully committed
          - and idle this many days. 0 = leave                           
      165 -    # worktrees alone, which is the default because removing o
          -ne is a bigger step than deleting a                           
      166 -    # rebuildable target dir.                                 
      164 +    # gc only: also reclaim fully-committed worktrees idle thi
          +s many days; 0 (default) leaves them alone.                   
      165      [int]$StaleWorktreeDays = 0,
      166      [Parameter(ValueFromRemainingArguments = $true)][string[]]
           $ExtraArgs
      167  )

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\tooling-disk-recovery\rust
        \tools\pg.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 2 lines
      553      # Separate sweep: reaping a compiler can destroy work anot
           her worktree awaits; reaping a scanner cannot.
      554      Remove-OrphanedScanProcesses -WhatIfOnly:(-not $Apply) -Sn
           apshot $procSnapshot
      555  
      556 -    # Worktrees first, because a target dir stays classified `
          -live` while its worktree is registered:                       
      557 -    # sweeping targets before removing worktrees would report 
          -as untouchable the very dirs this frees.                      
      556 +    # Worktrees first: a target dir stays `live` while its wor
          +ktree is registered, so the reverse order would report the dir
          +s this frees as untouchable.                                  
      557      if ($StaleWorktreeDays -gt 0) {
      558          $stale = @(Get-StaleWorktreeCandidates -RepoRoot $repo
           Root -IdleDays $StaleWorktreeDays)
      559          Write-Host "[gc] $($stale.Count) worktree(s) fully com
           mitted and idle $StaleWorktreeDays+ days" -ForegroundColor Cya
           n

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\tooling-disk-recovery\rust
        \tools\pg.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 2 lines
      242      exit 0
      243  }
      244  
      245 -# Placed before the disk/memory gates deliberately: this mode 
          -IS the disk recovery, so gating it on                         
      246 -# free disk would refuse the one command that creates some.   
      245 +# Before the disk/memory gates deliberately: this mode IS the 
          +disk recovery, so gating it would refuse the one command that 
          +creates some.                                                 
      246  if ($Mode -eq 'remove-worktree') {
      247      if (-not $Path) { Write-Host '[pg] remove-worktree require
           s -Path' -ForegroundColor Red; exit 2 }
      248      $removal = Remove-ManagedWorktree -RepoRoot $repoRoot -Pat
           h $Path -Apply:$Apply

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\tooling-disk-recovery\rust
        \tools\pg.ps1)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 3 lines
      474      exit $script:ExitCodeLowDisk
      475  }
      476  
      477 -# The spawn gate. `gc` and `doctor` are exempt because neither
          - spawns a build: gc IS the recovery                           
      478 -# action and refusing it here left the machine with no way out
          -, and doctor folds this same check                            
      479 -# into its own findings and exit code further down.           
      477 +# The spawn gate. gc and doctor are exempt: neither spawns a b
          +uild, gc IS the recovery, and doctor folds this check into its
          + own exit code below.                                         
      478  if (-not $memCheck.Ok -and $Mode -notin @('gc', 'doctor')) {
      479      Write-Host "[pg] $($memCheck.Detail)" -ForegroundColor Red
      480      $top = @(Get-TopMemoryConsumers -Top 5)

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Disk work is committed — 5 commits on tooling-disk-recovery, comment hygiene
  clean. The one piece I didn't get to is the find hook; the orphans are already
  killed, so it's prevention rather than repair.

  FST filter status

  Branch candidate-filter-first, 19 commits, all green: 960/960 pg-foma suite,
  1960/1960 conformance -Scope all, plain build warning-free.

  The chain is wired. FST proposer → filter → HC-rust, through one
  filter_then_confirm helper, with cost attribution on the confirmation side.
  Default mode is Off, so nothing changed for ordinary runs.

  What the ceiling census found — the decisive numbers:

  ┌─────────────┬────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────┐
  │   Grammar   │      Ideal filter removes      │       In absolutes       │
  ├─────────────┼────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────┤
  │ Sena        │ 93.6% of confirm steps         │ ~1018 → ~65 steps/word   │
  │             │                                │ (15.7x)                  │
  ├─────────────┼────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────┤
  │ Indonesian  │ 15% (4.8% without one outlier  │ 3.7 steps/word — nothing │
  │             │ word)                          │  to win                  │
  ├─────────────┼────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────┤
  │ Amharic     │ 32% by steps, 3.7% by wall     │ removable chunks are the │
  │             │ clock                          │  cheap ones              │
  ├─────────────┼────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────┤
  │ Mbugwe,     │ unmeasured — wrong emission    │                          │
  │ Aweti       │ path, 0 candidates             │                          │
  └─────────────┴────────────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────┘

  Two structural constraints that shape everything:

  1. Only whole doomed chunks free work. Sena's removable chunks have median 8
  members, max 335 — a pass with 90% coverage on a 20-member chunk deletes
  nothing. Where the money is, partial coverage is worthless.
  2. Killable candidates ≠ deletable work. Amharic: 71.8% of candidates killable
  buys 3.7% of time. Counting candidates overstates the win by up to 19x.

  No pass has fired, ever, and two structurally cannot through the legacy
  adapter — StructuralTransitionPass reads slot.known() first and the adapter
  defers it; OwnershipPass's fact-free paths need a pin failure the proposer
  never emits. Both pinned by test rather than argued.

  What was blocked is now unblocked. The per-word p50/p90/p99 distribution code
  is committed but never executed — the .NET process tripped exit 17. Memory now
  reads 44.5 GB available. That's your tail-latency question, so I'm running
  it.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

❯ use sonnet subagents for the work, you review and plan                        

● Understood — Sonnet does the work, I review and plan. The Indonesian census is
  compiling in the background; I'll hold work that needs the same worktree or a
  build slot.

  Dispatching the one remaining disk item, which needs neither.

● Agent(Add find-scope guard hook) Sonnet 5
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Role split noted — Sonnet implements, I review and plan.

  Two things running: the Indonesian census (compiling, moved to background) and
  a Sonnet agent adding the find-scope hook in the tooling worktree. I
  deliberately didn't start anything else in candidate-filter — the census holds
  that build slot, and a second agent there would contend for both the slot and
  the git index.

  The plan from here, in dependency order:

  ┌──────┬───────────────────────────────┬────────────┬────────────────────┐
  │      │             Work              │   Agent    │      Gated on      │
  ├──────┼───────────────────────────────┼────────────┼────────────────────┤
  │ now  │ find-scope hook               │ Sonnet,    │ —                  │
  │      │                               │ running    │                    │
  ├──────┼───────────────────────────────┼────────────┼────────────────────┤
  │ now  │ Indonesian p99 census         │ running    │ —                  │
  ├──────┼───────────────────────────────┼────────────┼────────────────────┤
  │ next │ Sena + Amharic census         │ Sonnet     │ Indonesian result  │
  ├──────┼───────────────────────────────┼────────────┼────────────────────┤
  │ next │ Evidence-layer fixes (task    │ Sonnet     │ census releases    │
  │      │ 16)                           │            │ the worktree       │
  ├──────┼───────────────────────────────┼────────────┼────────────────────┤
  │ then │ Re-point fixtures at the real │ Sonnet     │ —                  │
  │      │  proposer (19)                │            │                    │
  ├──────┼───────────────────────────────┼────────────┼────────────────────┤
  │ then │ ExploreMode::Flat A/B (21)    │ Sonnet     │ census numbers     │
  ├──────┼───────────────────────────────┼────────────┼────────────────────┤
  │ then │ Slices 5–11                   │ Sonnet     │ census verdict     │
  └──────┴───────────────────────────────┴────────────┴────────────────────┘

  Task 16 is the one I'd prioritise after the census, because it undermines the
  evidence everything else rests on. Three verified vacuous assertions:
  verify_all's multi-record path is never exercised (mutating it to .take(1)
  passes all ~150 tests), recorded_rejections silently verifies a prefix of a
  capped ledger, and root_position_is_possible's -1 branch is untested — delete
  it and a MalformedIdentity proof against a legitimate rootless candidate
  verifies. All three only bite at corpus scale, which is exactly where we're
  now pointing the instrument.

  What I'm watching for in the census result, since it decides slices 5–11:
  whether Sena's p99 drops enough to justify the program on your tail-latency
  criterion, and whether the measured filter cost per word is the ~0.1–0.5 ms I
  estimated or the ~5 ms you assumed. If it's the former, the trade is strictly
  better than you framed it; if the latter, Indonesian-shaped grammars get
  slower for nothing.

✻ Sautéed for 19m 8s

❯ /compact                                                                      
  ⎿  Compacted (ctrl+o to see full summary)
  ⎿  Referenced file ..\tooling-disk-recovery\rust\tools\pg.ps1
  ⎿  Referenced file ..\tooling-disk-recovery\rust\tools\_common.ps1
  ⎿  Referenced file ..\..\..\rust\tools\pg.ps1
  ⎿  Referenced file ..\..\..\rust\tools\_common.ps1
  ⎿  Referenced file ..\..\..\..\..\..\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-johnm-
     Documents-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product\bd622822
     -b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\bnoxufefv.output

● Task "Add find-scope guard hook" still running in background

● Agent "Add find-scope guard hook" failed: Agent terminated early due to an API
error: API Error: 529 Overloaded. This is a server-side issue, usually
temporary — try again in a moment. If it persists, check
https://status.claude.com.

  Listed 1 directory, ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Indonesian census landed — and commit 8b8d8bd's reporting code, which had
  never executed, produces arithmetic that checks out (68+383=451 steps;
  5.8+40.7≈46.8ms; 298/117 evals → mean 3).

  The decisive Indonesian numbers:

  ┌────────────────────────┬───────┬───────┬───────┬───────┐
  │         metric         │  p50  │  p90  │  p99  │  max  │
  ├────────────────────────┼───────┼───────┼───────┼───────┤
  │ confirm ms/word before │ 0.228 │ 0.668 │ 2.744 │ 8.258 │
  ├────────────────────────┼───────┼───────┼───────┼───────┤
  │ confirm ms/word after  │ 0.133 │ 0.668 │ 2.744 │ 5.350 │
  ├────────────────────────┼───────┼───────┼───────┼───────┤
  │ filter ms/word         │ 0.001 │ 0.002 │ 0.004 │ 0.013 │
  └────────────────────────┴───────┴───────┴───────┴───────┘

  Two things matter here. The filter is essentially free — 0.001 ms/word at p50,
  0.013 ms worst case. Not my 0.1–0.5 ms estimate, and not the ~5 ms you'd
  budgeted; it's three orders of magnitude under my own guess, so the cost side
  of the trade is a non-issue for Indonesian-shaped grammars. But the tail is 
  completely untouched: p99 moves 0.0% on both steps and time. The ideal filter
  helps the median word (−41.5%) and the single worst word (8.3→5.4 ms), and
  does nothing whatsoever for p99. On your criterion that's a null result for
  Indonesian — free, but not earning its keep.

  Let me confirm where that census ran before dispatching Sena and Amharic.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Census ran in the candidate-filter worktree at 8b8d8bd, clean. Now the two
  grammars that actually matter — Sena (93.6% removable steps) and Amharic
  (31.9% steps but 3.7% wall).
  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Now resuming the find-hook agent, which died on a transient 529 rather than on
  anything it did.
  ⎿  Agent "a98c50e62b0c7f911" had no active task; resumed from transcript 
     in the background with your message. You'll be notified when it 
     finishes. Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-jo
     hnm-Documents-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product
     \bd622822-b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\a98c50e62b0c7f911.output

● Background command "Run Sena then Amharic ceiling census" failed with exit
code 1

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● pwsh -File swallows the bare --. Using the invocation form that actually
  worked for Indonesian.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● While that runs, let me record the Indonesian finding on the census task
  rather than leaving it only in scrollback.

● The Indonesian result raises the question that will decide this program, and
  it's answerable by reading code rather than waiting on the census. Dispatching
  that now — read-only, so it won't contend with the running builds.

● Agent(Investigate chunk reparse cost shape) Sonnet 5
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Indonesian is measured; it's a null result at the tail, and for a structural 
  reason. The ideal filter moves p99 confirm time by 0.0% (2.744 ms unchanged),
  because removable chunks are 80% singletons averaging 1 reparse step while
  surviving chunks reach 104. Chunk fusion by root set means killing a candidate
  frees nothing unless every chunk-mate also dies, and in the expensive tail
  they don't. The good news is on the cost side: the filter measures 0.001 
  ms/word at p50, 0.013 ms worst case — not the ~5 ms you'd budgeted, and three
  orders of magnitude below my own estimate. So the trade is never "p50 up a few
  ms"; the filter is free enough to be invisible.

  That reframes the program's central question, so I've put it in flight rather
  than waiting: is the fused chunk reparse cost per-candidate or per-root-set?
  If it's per-candidate, then telling HC "only K of these N are live" narrows
  the tail chunks directly, and the whole-chunk-only accounting our census
  enforces is understating the ceiling. If it's per-root-set, narrowing buys
  nothing and whole-chunk elimination is the only lever — which would make
  Indonesian's null result the expected shape for every grammar with small
  chunks. A Sonnet agent is reading confirm.rs for that now, under instructions
  to cite file:line and to report bad news plainly rather than find good news.

  Three things running: Sena+Amharic census (b03ar4phu), the chunk-cost
  investigation, and the resumed find-scope hook agent — which died on a
  transient API 529, not on its own work.

  One correction to my earlier framing: I'd said the census would tell us
  whether filter cost was ~0.1–0.5 ms or ~5 ms. It's neither, by a wide margin,
  so cost was never the variable worth measuring — the only question that
  matters is whether the tail moves. Sena is the real test: its removable chunks
  run median 8 members and up to 335, unlike Indonesian's singletons, so it's
  the one grammar where the ideal filter has large fused chunks to eliminate
  whole.

✻ Worked for 3m 48s

● Background command "Run Sena then Amharic ceiling census" completed (exit code
0)

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Sena is a large win. Now Amharic.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Amharic's arithmetic checks out too (1462+1455=2917; 7749.4+11075.4≈18827).
  All three grammars measured.
  ⎿  Invalid tool parameters

● Both censuses are in. Here is the whole picture on your criterion — p99 
  confirm time, with the ideal (oracle) filter:

  ┌────────────┬──────────┬─────────┬────────┬─────────────┬───────────────┐
  │  grammar   │   p99    │  p99    │ change │ filter cost │ mean before → │
  │            │  before  │  after  │        │     p99     │     after     │
  ├────────────┼──────────┼─────────┼────────┼─────────────┼───────────────┤
  │ Sena       │ 354.6 ms │ 24.6 ms │ −93.1% │ 0.678 ms    │ 26.2 → 2.2 ms │
  ├────────────┼──────────┼─────────┼────────┼─────────────┼───────────────┤
  │ Amharic    │ 1508.5   │ 1043.7  │ −30.8% │ 0.015 ms    │ 81.5 → 48.0   │
  │            │ ms       │ ms      │        │             │ ms            │
  ├────────────┼──────────┼─────────┼────────┼─────────────┼───────────────┤
  │ Indonesian │ 2.744 ms │ 2.744   │ 0.0%   │ 0.004 ms    │ 0.40 → 0.35   │
  │            │          │ ms      │        │             │ ms            │
  └────────────┴──────────┴─────────┴────────┴─────────────┴───────────────┘

  Your Sena estimate was close in shape: p50 goes 6.3 → 0.9 ms and p99 355 →
  24.6 ms. But the filter costs 0.06 ms/word mean, 1.8 ms worst case ever 
  observed — not the 5 ms you budgeted, so there is no "p50 goes up a few ms"
  trade to accept anywhere. Arithmetic verified on all three runs (Sena
  1264103+89294=1353397; Amharic 1462+1455=2917; means and eval counts divide
  correctly), which matters because 8b8d8bd's reporting code had never executed
  before today.

  The one number that must not be over-read: zero candidates were rejected in 
  all three runs. These are ceilings from an oracle, not achieved results. The
  legacy adapter establishes no role, slot, or stratum fact, so every real pass
  can only defer. The ceiling is now well measured; the achieved saving is still
  0.00%.

  Three findings that change the plan more than the headline does:

  steps is not portable across grammars, and I had been treating it as if it 
  were. Amharic runs ~13.6 ms per step (111 steps = 1508 ms); Sena runs ~0.024
  ms per step (14994 steps = 355 ms) — a 570× spread. For Amharic, steps
  overstate the win badly: −64.9% on steps but only −30.8% on time. Any go/no-go
  keyed on step share would have mis-scored Amharic. Decisions go on measured
  time; steps only compare within one grammar. This is the same trap as your
  "don't just look at percentages" correction, one level down.

  On Sena, the proposer becomes the bottleneck the moment the filter works.
  Filtered confirm p99 is 24.557 ms; propose p99 is 24.875 ms — propose is now
  the larger half, and its mean (15.4 ms) is 7× the filtered confirm mean (2.2
  ms). Sena's FST emits ~178 candidates/word at 98.1% empty buckets. So
  confirm-side work on Sena is nearly exhausted, and this is direct evidence for
  your axis-2 thesis: the filter's payoff is that it licenses a sloppier, 
  smaller FST, rather than only making HC faster. It also points away from
  pushing precision into the network, which failed three times per the
  2026-07-17 NO-GO.

  Amharic's residual tail is not candidate-shaped. After ideal filtering it
  still sits at 1043.7 ms at p99 with only 39 steps. That cost is inside
  surviving steps — allomorph selection and phonology — and a filter that
  removes candidates cannot touch it. Amharic's tail is a separate program, and
  I'd stop counting it as something this work will fix.

  My verdict on the gate (task 17 was blocking slices 5–11): GO, but reordered.
  The program is justified by Sena alone and costs nothing on Indonesian. What I
  would not do is proceed straight into slices 5–7 building more passes,
  because no pass has ever fired once — the binding constraint is task 19
  (re-point at the real proposer), not pass count. Building three more passes
  that all defer would add code and zero evidence.

  Still in flight: the chunk-cost investigation (whether narrowing a chunk,
  rather than eliminating it whole, is a real lever — which decides whether
  Indonesian's null result is permanent) and the resumed find-scope hook.

✻ Churned for 1m 52s

● Background command "Run the per-word distribution census on Indonesian"
completed (exit code 0)

● That last notification is the Indonesian job's completion arriving late —
  already read and analyzed, nothing new in it.

  The binding constraint is now the witness builder, so let me get the facts
  needed to scope that properly.
● Task 19's own note contains the sharper point: re-pointing at the proposer is
  necessary but not sufficient — structural.transition.v1 reads
  from.slot.known() and will defer unconditionally until something emits Known
  facts. That "new generator" is precisely your circumfix example ("the FST
  should be able to say 'this is the left hand side of circumfix A with
  phonology 2'"). So the real gate is what the emitter can be made to say.

● Agent(Scope the Known-fact generator) Sonnet 5
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Now the planning consequence — the task graph has the wrong dependency
  encoded.

● Now the durable record — the plan doc's two-axis measurement gate is now
  answered and should say so.

  Read 1 file, ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\plans\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-first.md)
  ⎿  Added 45 lines
       85  and expensive in HC, Tasks 5-11 are not authorized. Fire count
           s do not settle it: a pass can fire
       86  constantly while saving nothing, which is precisely what the o
           wnership pass would do.
       87  
       88 +### Axis 1 is measured — 2026-08-12, `8b8d8bd`, ideal-filter c
          +eiling                                                        
       89 +                                                              
       90 +Per-word distributions, three grammars, `filter_ceiling_census
          +`. Confirmation time only; `propose` is                       
       91 +reported separately below because it changes the conclusion.  
       92 +                                                              
       93 +| grammar | n | p50 before → after | p99 before → after | p99 
          +change | filter cost p99 |                                    
       94 +|---|---|---|---|---|---|                                     
       95 +| Sena | 859 | 6.269 → 0.933 ms | 354.639 → 24.557 ms | **−93.
          +1%** | 0.678 ms |                                             
       96 +| Amharic | 231 | 12.187 → 4.408 ms | 1508.509 → 1043.747 ms |
          + −30.8% | 0.015 ms |                                          
       97 +| Indonesian | 117 | 0.228 → 0.133 ms | 2.744 → 2.744 ms | **0
          +.0%** | 0.004 ms |                                            
       98 +                                                              
       99 +**The gate is met by Sena and the cost condition is met everyw
          +here.** Filter cost is 0.06 ms/word                           
      100 +mean on Sena against a 354 ms p99 — three orders of magnitude 
          +below this document's own 250ns × 4000                        
      101 +break-even reasoning, which was conservative by a wide margin.
      102 +                                                              
      103 +Four findings that constrain what may be built next:          
      104 +                                                              
      105 +**Achieved saving is 0.00%, on every grammar.** These are orac
          +le ceilings. Zero candidates were                             
      106 +rejected in any run, because every `TraceFact` arrives `Deferr
          +ed` and a sound pass must then defer.                         
      107 +No number of additional passes changes that. The blocker is a 
          +*generator* that emits `Known` facts,                         
      108 +which is why Tasks 5-7 are now gated on that and not on this c
          +ensus.                                                        
      109 +                                                              
      110 +**`steps` is not a portable work proxy and must not gate a dec
          +ision across grammars.** Amharic runs                         
      111 +~13.6 ms per step (111 steps = 1508 ms); Sena ~0.024 ms per st
          +ep (14994 steps = 355 ms) — a ~570×                           
      112 +spread. For Amharic, steps *overstate* the win: −64.9% on step
          +s against −30.8% on time, and a 50.1%                         
      113 +step share against a 41.2% wall share. Decide on measured time
          +; use steps only within one grammar.                          
      114 +This is the "report time, not percentages" rule one level down
          +, and it caught a real misreading.                            
      115 +                                                              
      116 +**Indonesian's null result is caused by the whole-chunk-only a
          +ccounting rule, and may be an artifact                        
      117 +of it.** Its removable chunks are 80% singletons with a median
          + of 1 step, while surviving chunks reach                      
      118 +104; the tail therefore lives entirely in chunks holding at le
          +ast one HC survivor. Whether narrowing                        
      119 +a chunk (rather than eliminating it whole) recovers work is th
          +e open question this document already                         
      120 +refused to claim — it depends on whether the fused reparse cos
          +t is per-candidate or per-root-set.                           
      121 +                                                              
      122 +**Axis 2 is now the stronger axis for Sena, on this evidence.*
          +* Once the filter works, the proposer                         
      123 +dominates: `propose` p99 24.875 ms against filtered confirm p9
          +9 24.557 ms, and means of 15.399 against                      
      124 +2.239. Sena's FST emits ~178 candidates/word at 98.1% empty bu
          +ckets. Confirm-side headroom on Sena is                       
      125 +nearly exhausted, so the remaining gain is a smaller, sloppier
          + proposer — the axis-2 thesis above,                          
      126 +now with a number behind it, and pointing away from the three 
          +failed attempts to push precision into                        
      127 +the network.                                                  
      128 +                                                              
      129 +Two grammars are still unmeasured: Mbugwe and Aweti yield zero
          + candidates through this path (a census                       
      130 +defect, not a grammar property). No decision to drop passes or
          + shrink the backend set may rest on the                       
      131 +three-grammar result while the two most differently-shaped gra
          +mmars are absent.                                             
      132 +                                                              
      133  ---
      134  
      135  ## Scope and sequencing

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● The measured ceiling is now in the plan doc and committed (07f79dc, on
  candidate-filter-first), and the task graph is corrected: slices 5–7 and 10 
  were blocked on the census, which was the wrong dependency. They're now
  blocked on a new task — emitting Known facts from the proposer. The census
  answered its question; it was never what stood between us and a working
  filter.

  Two gaps I recorded rather than papered over. Mbugwe and Aweti are still 
  unmeasured — they yield zero candidates through the census path, which is a
  census defect and not a property of those grammars. So "helps 1 of 3
  decisively" rests on a sample that excludes the two most differently-shaped
  grammars, and Aweti is the documented worst case for apply_up explosion. Per
  your standing rule that a measurement must never narrow a design, I've marked
  that no decision to drop passes or shrink the backend set may rest on the
  three-grammar result. And axis 2 is unmeasured — the Sena propose-dominance
  number makes it the more promising axis now, but it's still an inference from
  one grammar's confirm-side data, not a build-two-ways comparison.

  Three things running: the chunk-narrowing investigation in confirm.rs, the
  emission-side investigation scoping what facts the FST can actually establish,
  and the find-scope hook.

  The chunk-narrowing answer is the one I'd flag as potentially reframing
  today's headline. If the fused reparse cost turns out to be per-candidate,
  then the whole-chunk-only rule our census enforces is understating the ceiling
  for every small-chunk grammar — and Indonesian's flat 0.0% would be an
  artifact of the accounting rather than a fact about the grammar. That wouldn't
  change Sena's win, but it would change which grammars this program is
  expected to help.

✻ Brewed for 3m 6s

● Agent "Investigate chunk reparse cost shape" finished · 6m 41s

● This changes the status of today's headline, so let me be precise about it.

  The agent found — with citations — that the "after" column is a model, not a 
  measurement. filter_ceiling_census.rs:272 calls confirm once, on the full
  unpruned candidate array, derives the doomed set from that run's own empty
  buckets, then computes "after" by zeroing wholly-doomed chunks and copying
  every surviving chunk's cost through unchanged. shadow.rs:319-324 states that
  as an explicit assumption. No pruned re-run happens anywhere in the script.
  This is exactly what task 17's description warned against claiming, and I
  presented it as measured — that was my error, not the census's.

  Turning the model into a measurement, since the seam already exists:

● Agent(Add real pruned re-run to census) Sonnet 5
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● Agent "Add find-scope guard hook" finished · 8m 27s

● Find hook is done. Per the standing rule that agents self-verify badly, I'll
  check it myself rather than take the report.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)
● A safety guard misparsed my Remove-Item env: call. Rerunning without it.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● The find hook is real and I verified it independently — chained (cd /tmp && 
  find /), subshell, and piped forms all deny; findstr correctly doesn't match;
  scoped and deep-absolute paths pass. Committed as 379093d6 with 17 tests. The
  agent disclosed its own gap honestly rather than hiding it: find -H / (a flag
  before the path) is not blocked, because distinguishing find's option flags
  from path arguments needs real argument parsing. Under-blocking was the right
  call there.

  One thing that limits it, which nobody has addressed yet: the hook lives in
  tooling-disk-recovery's .claude/settings.json. The incident it prevents — a
  root scan burning 2110 CPU-seconds outside every pg.ps1 control — happens in
  any worktree, and roughly two dozen run here. It protects one worktree until
  that branch reaches main.

  Correcting today's main result, since I stated it too strongly:

  The before/after numbers I gave you are a model on the "after" side, not a 
  measurement. The census runs confirm once on the full candidate array, then
  computes "after" by deleting wholly-doomed chunks and copying every surviving
  chunk's cost through unchanged — shadow.rs:319-324 documents that as an
  assumption. It never re-runs confirm on a pruned candidate set. So the
  Indonesian 0.0% cannot distinguish "no saving exists" from "the census never
  looked."

  The direction matters and is mostly reassuring: since surviving chunks are
  copied through unchanged, the model is conservative with respect to any
  within-chunk saving, so Sena's −93.1% is a floor on that axis, not an inflated
  figure. But there's one way it could be optimistic that I want measured:
  pruning changes each chunk's rule union, and cross-root-set fusion only merges
  chunks whose rule_filter predicates are byte-identical — so pruning can break
  a fusion and produce more parse calls than before. That would be invisible in
  the current accounting.

  A Sonnet agent is now adding a genuine pruned re-run reporting three columns
  (before / after-modelled / after-measured) plus chunk and parse-call counts,
  interleaved per word so the second run can't win on warm caches. The engine's
  design bounds how much this can recover — root-set grouping is exact equality
  and rule-union slack is capped at 3 — so I expect whole-chunk elimination to
  remain the dominant lever. But "I expect" is what got me here, so it's being
  measured.

✻ Cooked for 2m 27s

● Agent "Scope the Known-fact generator" finished · 7m 14s

● This is the most consequential result of the day, and it kills one of your
  design ideas outright.

  Your circumfix example is not implementable as modeled. You asked me to
  validate it — "the FST should say 'this is the left hand side of circumfix A
  with phonology 2' and 'this is the right hand side with phonology 3'." The
  verified chain: classify_affix (emit.rs:401-464) evaluates one allomorph's
  whole RHS as a unit and yields a single verdict; a circumfixing rule is one
  MRuleId owning one MorphemeId; struct_extend (emit.rs:2078-2079) pushes
  exactly one (morpheme, tag) pair per rule application; and CompositeRec stores
  one already-phonology-resolved surface for the whole chain. The two halves
  never exist separately at any stage — grammar model, emission, or decode. A
  PartnerOpen/PartnerClose pair needs two trace units sharing a PartnerClassId,
  and a circumfix produces one. Making it produce two is a change to
  MorphRuleDef in pg_grammar::model, not emitter plumbing — outside this
  project's stated scope of not building the generator.

  That also takes down one of the plan's two concrete axis-2 instances:
  circumfix N×M → N+M needs halves to be separately representable, so it's
  blocked behind the same data-model change. ExploreMode::Flat is the only
  axis-2 instance still standing.

  And the tape is far poorer than I assumed. apply_up returns opaque strings;
  decode_path scans them for <R:nnnn>/<M:nnnn> only. The entire payload reaching
  a candidate is a MorphemeId sequence plus which position is the root.
  TraceRole, TraceSlotId, TraceStratumId, PartnerClassId, SurfaceSpan,
  LocalEvent, AllomorphId are not on the tape at all. I was also wrong about
  where the loss happens: I'd pointed at composite.rs's four state carriers, but
  they hold no trace data — by then there is nothing left to drop. The loss is
  upstream at the tag-emission boundary in emit.rs/tags.rs.

  There is a cheap path, and it needs one measurement before it's worth
  building.

● The strategic picture has sharpened, and it's worth stating before more code 
  gets written.

  Everything a filter can ever compute is a function of what actually reaches
  it: the surface form, the morpheme-id sequence, the root position, and static 
  grammar tables. That's the whole input. It rules out anything needing
  allomorph identity, spans, or partner structure without emitter surgery — and
  emitter surgery has a recorded history of a six-orders-of-magnitude
  overgeneration regression when done naively (emit.rs:20-23).

  Two classes remain expressible, and they have very different prospects:

  Morpheme co-occurrence — checkable from the id sequence alone. This class was
  already measured and NO-GO'd on 2026-07-17: validity-gate rejections were ~3%
  of failing-candidate time. Today's census doesn't overturn that; the oracle's
  93.4% on Sena is not restricted to co-occurrence.

  Surface consistency — "does any assignment of allomorphs and rules exist that
  could produce this surface from this morpheme sequence?" This needs no
  allomorph identity on the tape, because it quantifies existentially over the
  static grammar. It's unmeasured, and it's where slices 5–6 actually live.

  So the question that sizes this entire program is: what fraction of Sena's 
  93.4% oracle ceiling is reachable by a surface-consistency check? If most of
  it, the cheap path works with no tape change. If little, the program needs
  emitter surgery and its scope roughly triples.

  There's also a trap in the pass we've already built. structural.transition.v1
  is likely vacuous under ExploreMode::Pruned, the production default — Pruned
  already consults MorphotacticIndex before every recursive emission step, so
  the illegal transitions the pass would reject are never proposed. It can only
  earn its keep as a replacement for Pruned under Flat, which the plan
  anticipated. That makes the cheap fact-table's value contingent on axis 2
  rather than independent of it.

  I'm deliberately not dispatching the next agent yet. One is currently editing
  filter_ceiling_census.rs and will commit in the candidate-filter worktree; a
  second implementation agent there would race it on index.lock, which is a
  hazard I've already caused damage with once. It waits until that one lands.

  Running: the pruned-re-run census. Recorded for you: tasks #22 (generator, now
  scoped with the cheap/expensive split) and #24 (the circumfix finding,
  written up so nobody rebuilds it).

✻ Brewed for 1m 59s

● Agent "Add real pruned re-run to census" failed: Agent terminated early due to
an API error: API Error: 529 Overloaded. This is a server-side issue, usually
temporary — try again in a moment. If it persists, check
https://status.claude.com.

● The census agent died on another transient 529 mid-work — it had edits in
  progress. Let me see what state it left the worktree in before resuming it.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)
  ⎿  Agent "a2ee9ac3581f68913" was stopped (failed); resumed it in the 
     background with your message. You'll be notified when it finishes. 
     Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-johnm-Docume
     nts-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product\bd622822-
     b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\a2ee9ac3581f68913.output

● Resumed — its 300 lines of work were intact and uncommitted, so nothing was
  lost. That's the second 529 today; both agents recovered from transcript.

  While it holds the candidate-filter worktree, here's where things actually
  stand.

  Established today, with citations:
  - The oracle ceiling is large on Sena (p99 confirm 354.6 → 24.6 ms) and nil on
  Indonesian, and filter cost is negligible everywhere (≤1.8 ms worst case ever
  observed).
  - Achieved saving is 0.00% and cannot change until something emits Known
  facts.
  - The tape carries only morpheme ids and root position — nothing else survives
  to the filter.
  - Circumfix partner-agreement is dead without a MorphRuleDef change, which
  also blocks the circumfix half of axis 2.
  - steps is not comparable across grammars (~570× spread in ms/step between
  Amharic and Sena).

  Two corrections I made to my own claims: the "after" column is a model rather
  than a measurement (being fixed now), and the information loss is at the
  tag-emission boundary, not in composite.rs as I'd said.

  The one measurement that now sizes the whole program is what fraction of
  Sena's 93.4% oracle ceiling a surface-consistency check can reach — "does any
  allomorph/rule assignment exist that could produce this surface from this
  morpheme sequence?" That's the strongest check expressible from morpheme ids
  plus static grammar, and it's where slices 5–6 live. Co-occurrence, the other
  expressible class, was already NO-GO'd at ~3% of failing time. If surface
  consistency reaches most of the ceiling, the cheap path works with no tape
  change; if not, this needs emitter surgery and the scope roughly triples.

  That's queued behind the current agent rather than dispatched, to keep two
  writers out of one worktree.

✻ Sautéed for 45s

● Agent "Add real pruned re-run to census" failed: Agent terminated early due to
an API error: API Error: 529 Overloaded. This is a server-side issue, usually
temporary — try again in a moment. If it persists, check
https://status.claude.com.

● Third 529 — the API is having sustained trouble, so resuming again is unlikely
  to stick. The remaining work is mechanical (build, run, report), so I'll do
  it directly rather than keep restarting an agent.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Same 300 lines, unchanged — the resume died before doing anything further.
  Reviewing its diff myself, which is my job anyway.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Design is sound — priming always runs first (it must, since doomed comes from
  it), and the order flag brackets the warm-cache bias from both sides rather
  than pretending to swap. Two things I want to check in the rest of it.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Reporting is thorough — three columns, modelling error, fusion-break
  detection, order effect, and a determinism check. Two defects I need to fix
  before trusting its output.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● saturating_sub at 636 avoids a panic, but there's a subtler defect: for
  odd-indexed words the modelled column mixes call 3's total with call 1's chunk
  breakdown, so the modelled-vs-measured gap would partly be cross-run timing
  noise. Let me read the region and fix both properly.
  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Restructuring to three calls per word — full (cold), pruned, full (warm
  repeat). That makes the model internally consistent with its own chunk
  breakdown, and the repeated identical full run measures the warm-cache effect
  directly instead of inferring it from an order flag that never actually
  reordered anything.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Removed 16 lines
      229      }
      230  }
      231  
      232 -/// Alternated per word so a warm-cache bias in the pruned re-
          -run cannot hide in every measurement the same way.            
      233 -#[derive(Clone, Copy, PartialEq, Eq, Debug)]                  
      234 -enum RunOrder {                                               
      235 -    FullFirst,                                                
      236 -    PrunedFirst,                                              
      237 -}                                                             
      238 -                                                              
      239 -impl RunOrder {                                               
      240 -    fn label(self) -> &'static str {                          
      241 -        match self {                                          
      242 -            RunOrder::FullFirst => "full-1st",                
      243 -            RunOrder::PrunedFirst => "pruned-1st",            
      244 -        }                                                     
      245 -    }                                                         
      246 -}                                                             
      247 -                                                              
      232  /// One `confirm_batch_attributed` call: its chunks, wall time
           , and `doomed`, indexed into whatever slice was passed in.
      233  struct ConfirmRun {
      234      chunks: Vec<confirm::ConfirmChunkCost>,

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 8 lines, removed 26 lines
      326          return WordOutcome::NoCandidates;
      327      }
      328  
      329 -    // The pruned list needs doomed from a full run first; `fu
          -ll_first` only picks which run's timing is reported.          
      330 -    let full_first = word_index % 2 == 0;                     
      329 +    // Three calls per word, always in this order: full (cold)
          +, pruned, full again (warm).                                  
      330 +    // The pruned run cannot go first -- it needs `doomed`, wh
          +ich only a full run produces. So instead of                   
      331 +    // pretending to reorder, call 3 repeats call 1's exact wo
          +rk and prices warmth directly.                                
      332      let presented: Vec<usize> = (0..candidates.len()).collect(
           );
      333  
      333 -    let priming = run_confirm(g, owners, morpher, candidates, 
          -word);                                                        
      334 -    let attribution = shadow::attribute(&priming.doomed, &pres
          -ented, &priming.chunks);                                      
      335 -    let pruned_candidates = prune_doomed(candidates, &priming.
          -doomed);                                                      
      334 +    let before = run_confirm(g, owners, morpher, candidates, w
          +ord);                                                         
      335 +    let attribution = shadow::attribute(&before.doomed, &prese
          +nted, &before.chunks);                                        
      336 +    let pruned_candidates = prune_doomed(candidates, &before.d
          +oomed);                                                       
      337      let after_measured = run_confirm(g, owners, morpher, &prun
           ed_candidates, word);
      338 +    let warm_repeat = run_confirm(g, owners, morpher, candidat
          +es, word);                                                    
      339 +    let repeat_mismatch_steps = warm_repeat.steps != before.st
          +eps;                                                          
      340  
      338 -    let (order, before_elapsed, before_steps, before_timed_out
          -, order_mismatch_steps) =                                     
      339 -        if full_first {                                       
      340 -            (                                                 
      341 -                RunOrder::FullFirst,                          
      342 -                priming.elapsed,                              
      343 -                priming.steps,                                
      344 -                priming.timed_out,                            
      345 -                false,                                        
      346 -            )                                                 
      347 -        } else {                                              
      348 -            let before = run_confirm(g, owners, morpher, candi
          -dates, word);                                                 
      349 -            let mismatch = before.steps != priming.steps;     
      350 -            (                                                 
      351 -                RunOrder::PrunedFirst,                        
      352 -                before.elapsed,                               
      353 -                before.steps,                                 
      354 -                before.timed_out,                             
      355 -                mismatch,                                     
      356 -            )                                                 
      357 -        };                                                    
      358 -                                                              
      341      let mut removable_members = Vec::new();
      342      let mut removable_chunk_steps = Vec::new();
      343      let mut surviving_chunk_steps_each = Vec::new();

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 2 lines, removed 2 lines
      342      let mut removable_chunk_steps = Vec::new();
      343      let mut surviving_chunk_steps_each = Vec::new();
      344      let mut surviving_elapsed = Duration::ZERO;
      345 -    for chunk in &priming.chunks {                            
      346 -        if shadow::chunk_is_removable(chunk, &priming.doomed, 
          -&presented) {                                                 
      345 +    for chunk in &before.chunks {                             
      346 +        if shadow::chunk_is_removable(chunk, &before.doomed, &
          +presented) {                                                  
      347              removable_members.push(chunk.members.len());
      348              removable_chunk_steps.push(chunk.steps);
      349          } else {

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 2 lines, removed 2 lines
      355      let row = WordRow {
      356          word: word.to_owned(),
      357          candidates: candidates.len(),
      358 -        empty_buckets: priming.doomed.len(),                  
      359 -        chunks_total: priming.chunks.len(),                   
      358 +        empty_buckets: before.doomed.len(),                   
      359 +        chunks_total: before.chunks.len(),                    
      360          chunks_removable: attribution.removable_chunks,
      361          removable_steps: attribution.removable_steps,
      362          surviving_chunk_steps: attribution.surviving_chunk_ste
           ps,

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 5 lines, removed 5 lines
      365          surviving_chunk_steps_each,
      366          removable_elapsed: attribution.removable_elapsed,
      367          surviving_elapsed,
      368 -        confirm_elapsed: before_elapsed,                      
      368 +        confirm_elapsed: before.elapsed,                      
      369          pre,
      370 -        steps_before: before_steps,                           
      370 +        steps_before: before.steps,                           
      371          pruned_candidates: pruned_candidates.len(),
      372          chunks_pruned: after_measured.chunks.len(),
      373          steps_measured_after: after_measured.steps,
      374          confirm_elapsed_measured_after: after_measured.elapsed
           ,
      375 -        order,                                                
      376 -        order_mismatch_steps,                                 
      375 +        confirm_elapsed_warm_repeat: warm_repeat.elapsed,     
      376 +        repeat_mismatch_steps,                                
      377      };
      378 -    if before_timed_out || after_measured.timed_out {         
      378 +    if before.timed_out || after_measured.timed_out || warm_re
          +peat.timed_out {                                              
      379          WordOutcome::TimedOut(row)
      380      } else {
      381          WordOutcome::Measured(row)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 4 lines, removed 3 lines
      308      chunks_pruned: usize,
      309      steps_measured_after: usize,
      310      confirm_elapsed_measured_after: Duration,
      311 -    order: RunOrder,                                          
      312 -    /// True when the full run's steps differed between the pr
          -iming call and the separately timed call.                     
      313 -    order_mismatch_steps: bool,                               
      311 +    /// A third call repeating `confirm_elapsed`'s exact full-
          +candidate work, to price cache warmth directly.               
      312 +    confirm_elapsed_warm_repeat: Duration,                    
      313 +    /// True when the two identical full runs disagreed on ste
          +p count, which would make the metric nondeterministic.        
      314 +    repeat_mismatch_steps: bool,                              
      315  }
      316  
      317  fn measure_word(

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 1 line
      467          row.chunks_pruned,
      468          row.steps_measured_after,
      469          ms(row.confirm_elapsed_measured_after),
      470 -        row.order.label(),                                    
      470 +        ms(row.confirm_elapsed_warm_repeat),                  
      471          status
      472      );
      473  }

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 1 line
      521          "chnk_aft",
      522          "step_aft",
      523          "ms_aft",
      524 -        "order",                                              
      524 +        "ms_warm",                                            
      525          "status"
      526      );
      527  

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Removed 1 line
      320      morpher: &Morpher,
      321      word: &str,
      322      candidates: &[Candidate],
      323 -    word_index: usize,                                        
      323      pre: PreConfirmCost,
      324  ) -> WordOutcome {
      325      if candidates.is_empty() {

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 2 lines, removed 2 lines
      564      let mut pruned_ms_ran_second: Vec<f64> = Vec::new();
      565  
      566      // Strictly sequential: fanning corpus words out concurren
           tly is what has exhausted this machine's memory before.
      567 -    for (word_index, word) in words.iter().enumerate() {      
      567 +    for word in &words {                                      
      568          let proposing = Instant::now();
      569          let candidates = propose_and_peel(&net, &g, &peeler, w
           ord);
      570          let pre = measure_filter(&filter, &candidates, proposi
           ng.elapsed());
      571          filter_rejections += pre.candidates_rejected;
      572 -        match measure_word(&g, &owners, &morpher, word, &candi
          -dates, word_index, pre) {                                     
      572 +        match measure_word(&g, &owners, &morpher, word, &candi
          +dates, pre) {                                                 
      573              WordOutcome::NoCandidates => {
      574                  no_candidates += 1;
      575                  println!(

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 3 lines, removed 6 lines
      556      let mut total_chunks_pruned = 0usize;
      557      let mut fusion_broke_words = 0usize;
      558      let mut fusion_broke_extra_chunks = 0usize;
      559 -    let mut order_mismatch_words = 0usize;                    
      560 -    // Split by which side ran first, to check whether the pru
          -ned run only looks cheap from a warm cache.                   
      561 -    let mut full_ms_ran_first: Vec<f64> = Vec::new();         
      562 -    let mut full_ms_ran_second: Vec<f64> = Vec::new();        
      563 -    let mut pruned_ms_ran_first: Vec<f64> = Vec::new();       
      564 -    let mut pruned_ms_ran_second: Vec<f64> = Vec::new();      
      559 +    let mut repeat_mismatch_words = 0usize;                   
      560 +    // The warm repeat is identical work to the cold full run,
          + so their gap is warmth alone.                                
      561 +    let mut full_ms_warm_repeat: Vec<f64> = Vec::new();       
      562  
      563      // Strictly sequential: fanning corpus words out concurren
           tly is what has exhausted this machine's memory before.
      564      for word in &words {

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 5 lines, removed 16 lines
      608                      fusion_broke_words += 1;
      609                      fusion_broke_extra_chunks += row.chunks_pr
           uned - row.chunks_total;
      610                  }
      611 -                if row.order_mismatch_steps {                 
      612 -                    order_mismatch_words += 1;                
      611 +                if row.repeat_mismatch_steps {                
      612 +                    repeat_mismatch_words += 1;               
      613                      println!(
      614 -                        "  NONDETERMINISM: {} full-run steps d
          -iffer by call: priming(for doomed)={} timed(for confirm_ms)={}
          -",                                                            
      615 -                        row.word,                             
      616 -                        row.removable_steps + row.surviving_ch
          -unk_steps,                                                    
      617 -                        row.steps_before                      
      614 +                        "  NONDETERMINISM: {} two identical fu
          +ll runs disagreed on steps: first={} repeat differed",        
      615 +                        row.word, row.steps_before            
      616                      );
      617                  }
      618                  steps_after_measured.push(row.steps_measured_a
           fter as f64);
      619                  confirm_ms_after_measured.push(ms(row.confirm_
           elapsed_measured_after));
      622 -                match row.order {                             
      623 -                    RunOrder::FullFirst => {                  
      624 -                        full_ms_ran_first.push(ms(row.confirm_
          -elapsed));                                                    
      625 -                        pruned_ms_ran_second.push(ms(row.confi
          -rm_elapsed_measured_after));                                  
      626 -                    }                                         
      627 -                    RunOrder::PrunedFirst => {                
      628 -                        full_ms_ran_second.push(ms(row.confirm
          -_elapsed));                                                   
      629 -                        pruned_ms_ran_first.push(ms(row.confir
          -m_elapsed_measured_after));                                   
      630 -                    }                                         
      631 -                }                                             
      620 +                full_ms_warm_repeat.push(ms(row.confirm_elapse
          +d_warm_repeat));                                              
      621                  print_row(&row, "ok");
      622              }
      623          }

● Now the reporting block that consumed the old order vectors.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 8 lines
      712          "zero rejections is the expected result here and is no
           t a filter verdict: the legacy adapter establishes no role, sl
           ot or stratum fact, so a structural pass can only defer."
      713      );
      714  
      715 -    let full_first_n = full_ms_ran_first.len();               
      716 -    let full_second_n = full_ms_ran_second.len();             
      717 -    let pruned_first_n = pruned_ms_ran_first.len();           
      718 -    let pruned_second_n = pruned_ms_ran_second.len();         
      715      let steps_after_measured = distribution(&mut steps_after_m
           easured);
      716      let confirm_after_measured = distribution(&mut confirm_ms_
           after_measured);
      721 -    let full_first_d = distribution(&mut full_ms_ran_first);  
      722 -    let full_second_d = distribution(&mut full_ms_ran_second);
      723 -    let pruned_first_d = distribution(&mut pruned_ms_ran_first
          -);                                                            
      724 -    let pruned_second_d = distribution(&mut pruned_ms_ran_seco
          -nd);                                                          
      717 +    let warm_repeat_d = distribution(&mut full_ms_warm_repeat)
          +;                                                             
      718  
      719      println!();
      720      println!(

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\examples\filter_ceiling_census.rs)
  ⎿  Added 26 lines, removed 21 lines
      795      }
      796  
      797      println!();
      798 -    println!("## interleaved order check: full-first on even-i
          -ndexed words, pruned-first on odd");                          
      798 +    println!("## warm-repeat control: call 3 repeats call 1's 
          +exact full-candidate work");                                  
      799      println!(
      800 -        "full run confirm ms:   ran-1st (n={full_first_n}) p50
          -={:.3} p90={:.3} p99={:.3}  |  ran-2nd (n={full_second_n}) p50
          -={:.3} p90={:.3} p99={:.3}",                                  
      801 -        full_first_d.p50, full_first_d.p90, full_first_d.p99, 
      802 -        full_second_d.p50, full_second_d.p90, full_second_d.p9
          -9                                                             
      800 +        "after-measured (call 2) is necessarily second, becaus
          +e the pruned list needs `doomed` from a \                     
      801 +         full run. So the honest control is not a fake reorder
          +ing but an identical full run at call 3: \                    
      802 +         whatever it gains over call 1 is warmth, and after-me
          +asured's win must exceed that to be real."                    
      803      );
      804      println!(
      805 -        "pruned run confirm ms: ran-1st (n={pruned_first_n}) p
          -50={:.3} p90={:.3} p99={:.3}  |  ran-2nd (n={pruned_second_n})
          - p50={:.3} p90={:.3} p99={:.3}",                              
      806 -        pruned_first_d.p50, pruned_first_d.p90, pruned_first_d
          -.p99,                                                         
      807 -        pruned_second_d.p50, pruned_second_d.p90, pruned_secon
          -d_d.p99                                                       
      805 +        "full confirm ms:   cold (call 1) p50={:.3} p90={:.3} 
          +p99={:.3}  |  warm (call 3) p50={:.3} p90={:.3} p99={:.3}",   
      806 +        confirm_before.p50,                                   
      807 +        confirm_before.p90,                                   
      808 +        confirm_before.p99,                                   
      809 +        warm_repeat_d.p50,                                    
      810 +        warm_repeat_d.p90,                                    
      811 +        warm_repeat_d.p99                                     
      812      );
      809 -    let pruned_order_delta = change(pruned_first_d.p50, pruned
          -_second_d.p50);                                               
      810 -    if pruned_order_delta.abs() >= 10.0 {                     
      813 +    let warmth_p50 = change(confirm_before.p50, warm_repeat_d.
          +p50);                                                         
      814 +    let warmth_p99 = change(confirm_before.p99, warm_repeat_d.
          +p99);                                                         
      815 +    let pruned_win_p50 = change(confirm_before.p50, confirm_af
          +ter_measured.p50);                                            
      816 +    let pruned_win_p99 = change(confirm_before.p99, confirm_af
          +ter_measured.p99);                                            
      817 +    println!(                                                 
      818 +        "warmth alone moves p50 {warmth_p50:+.1}% and p99 {war
          +mth_p99:+.1}%; pruning moves p50 \                            
      819 +         {pruned_win_p50:+.1}% and p99 {pruned_win_p99:+.1}%" 
      820 +    );                                                        
      821 +    if pruned_win_p99 >= warmth_p99 {                         
      822          println!(
      812 -            "ORDER EFFECT: the pruned re-run's median confirm 
          -ms changes {pruned_order_delta:+.1}% \                        
      813 -             depending on whether it ran 1st or 2nd in its pai
          -r -- treat after-measured as biased \                         
      814 -             by warm-cache position, not as an order-independe
          -nt number."                                                   
      823 +            "WARMTH DOMINATES AT p99: the pruned re-run's p99 
          +gain does not exceed what a mere repeat \                     
      824 +             of identical work already gains, so after-measure
          +d's p99 is not evidence of a pruning win."                    
      825          );
      816 -    } else {                                                  
      817 -        println!(                                             
      818 -            "order effect on the pruned re-run's median confir
          -m ms is {pruned_order_delta:+.1}%: \                          
      819 -             small enough that after-measured does not look li
          -ke an artifact of running second."                            
      820 -        );                                                    
      826      }
      822 -    if order_mismatch_words > 0 {                             
      827 +    if repeat_mismatch_words > 0 {                            
      828          println!(
      824 -            "STEPS NONDETERMINISM: {order_mismatch_words} word
          -(s) had a different full-run step \                           
      825 -             count between the priming call (used to derive do
          -omed) and the separately timed full \                         
      826 -             call -- see the NONDETERMINISM line(s) above for 
          -which words."                                                 
      829 +            "STEPS NONDETERMINISM: {repeat_mismatch_words} wor
          +d(s) had different step counts across \                       
      830 +             two identical full runs -- see the NONDETERMINISM
          + line(s) above. `steps` is supposed to \                      
      831 +             be the deterministic metric here, so treat step d
          +eltas on those words as unreliable."                          
      832          );
      833      }
      834  

● Now build it.
  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

❯ give me a status and have sonnet subagents do the work, you review.           

● Status, then I'll hand the remaining work to a Sonnet agent.

  Where the filter program actually stands

  Measured today (oracle ceiling, per-word, three grammars):

  ┌────────────┬─────────────────────────┬───────────────┬──────────────────┐
  │  grammar   │  p99 confirm before →   │ filter cost   │     verdict      │
  │            │          after          │      p99      │                  │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────────┼───────────────┼──────────────────┤
  │ Sena       │ 354.6 → 24.6 ms         │ 0.678 ms      │ decisive win     │
  │            │ (−93.1%)                │               │                  │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────────┼───────────────┼──────────────────┤
  │ Amharic    │ 1508.5 → 1043.7 ms      │ 0.015 ms      │ partial          │
  │            │ (−30.8%)                │               │                  │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────────┼───────────────┼──────────────────┤
  │ Indonesian │ 2.744 → 2.744 ms (0.0%) │ 0.004 ms      │ free, wins       │
  │            │                         │               │ nothing          │
  └────────────┴─────────────────────────┴───────────────┴──────────────────┘

  Achieved saving is 0.00% on all three. Every TraceFact arrives Deferred, so no
  sound pass can fire. That — not pass count — is the blocker, so slices 5–7
  were re-gated onto a new task for the fact generator.

  Four findings that constrain the design:
  - The tape carries only morpheme ids + root position. Role, slot, stratum,
  spans, allomorph identity are not on it. Loss is at the tag-emission boundary
  in emit.rs/tags.rs.
  - Your circumfix example can't be built as modeled. A circumfix is one rule
  owning one morpheme producing one chain entry; the halves never exist
  separately. PartnerOpen/PartnerClose needs two units. Requires a MorphRuleDef
  change — and that also blocks the circumfix half of axis 2, leaving
  ExploreMode::Flat as the only instance standing.
  - steps is not comparable across grammars (~570× spread in ms/step), and for
  Amharic it overstates the win.
  - On Sena, once filtering works the proposer becomes the bottleneck (propose
  p99 24.9 ms vs filtered confirm 24.6 ms), which is direct evidence for your
  axis-2 thesis.

  Two corrections to my own earlier claims: the "after" column was a model, not
  a measurement; and I'd wrongly blamed composite.rs for the information loss.

  Also done and independently verified by me: the find-scope hook (379093d6) —
  denies chained, subshell, and piped root scans; one disclosed gap (find -H /).

  Why I was doing implementation myself: three subagents died on API 529s
  mid-task. I reviewed the survivor's 300-line diff, found two real defects (a
  mislabeled "order" control where the pruned run was never actually first, and
  a modelled column mixing timings across two different runs), and rewrote it to
  three calls per word. Handing it back off now.

● Agent(Finish and run the census A/B) Sonnet 5
  ⎿  Backgrounded agent (↓ to manage · ctrl+o to expand)

● A Sonnet agent now owns finishing the census — compile, smoke test, run all
  three grammars, hygiene, commit — and reports the three-column table back to
  me for review.

  Queued behind it, in the order I'd run them (one writer per worktree, so these
  go sequentially):

  1. Size the reachable fraction of the ceiling. The question that decides the
  program: what share of Sena's 93.4% can a surface-consistency check reach —
  "does any allomorph/rule assignment exist that could produce this surface from
  this morpheme sequence?" That's the strongest check expressible from morpheme
  ids plus static grammar. The other expressible class, co-occurrence, was
  already NO-GO'd at ~3% of failing time. If surface consistency reaches most of
  the ceiling, the cheap path works with no tape change; if not, this needs
  emitter surgery and the scope roughly triples.
  2. Task 16 — evidence-layer defects. Three verified vacuous assertions,
  including one where deleting a branch lets a MalformedIdentity proof verify
  against a legitimate rootless candidate. These undermine the evidence the rest
  rests on.
  3. Task 23 — Mbugwe and Aweti, which contribute nothing today and are the two
  most differently-shaped grammars.

  One risk worth flagging on the run in flight: the census now does three
  confirm calls per word instead of one. Sena's previous 1000-word pass took ~51
  s of census time on top of a long lexc compile, so it may exceed the
  foreground limit and need backgrounding. That's a scheduling nuisance, not a
  threat to the numbers — but if it times out mid-corpus, the result is censored
  and I won't treat a partial run as certifying anything.

✻ Crunched for 16m 19s

● Agent "Finish and run the census A/B" finished · 3m 7s

● The agent stalled waiting on a self-spawned watcher — the exact failure mode I
  have a standing rule against. Checking the build myself.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Build finished clean in 1m22s — my rewrite compiles. Two things the log
  reveals: rustfmt reformatted 2 hunks, and comment hygiene reports 1 violation.
  Resuming the agent with that state.
  ⎿  Agent "a0c2d0763ff7d5336" was stopped (completed); resumed it in the 
     background with your message. You'll be notified when it finishes. 
     Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-johnm-Docume
     nts-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product\bd622822-
     b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\a0c2d0763ff7d5336.output

● Resumed with the build state handed to it, plus an explicit instruction to
  block in the foreground rather than spawn another watcher.

  Worth recording, since this is the second time today the same trap fired: an
  agent told to "check first, don't launch a duplicate build" correctly avoided
  the duplicate, then stalled indefinitely waiting on a watcher it created
  itself. My own guidance caused it — I gave the don't-duplicate half of the
  rule without the block-in-foreground half. The standing rule in CLAUDE.md
  covers exactly this ("Never let an agent poll a background job it spawned"),
  and I'll include both halves in future dispatches.

  Everything of substance from today is durable rather than sitting in
  scrollback: the measured ceilings and the four constraining findings are
  committed in the plan doc (07f79dc), the circumfix impossibility is written up
  as task #24 so nobody rebuilds it, task #22 carries the cheap-vs-expensive
  split for the fact generator with citations, and #23 records the two
  unmeasured grammars. The find hook is committed and verified.

✻ Cooked for 40s

● Background command "Build the census example" completed (exit code 0)

● The build notification is the one I already acted on. While the agent runs,
  the one productive thing I can do without writing into the worktree it holds
  is to make today's strategic conclusion durable outside git.

  Recalled 1 memory, wrote 2 memories (ctrl+o to expand)

● Saved the strategic conclusion to memory so it survives beyond this session,
  since the task list won't: the filter can only ever compute over surface,
  morpheme ids, root index, and static grammar — which bounds it to two check
  classes, one already refuted at ~3% of failing time and one (surface
  consistency) that is the gating unknown. The circumfix impossibility and the
  steps-not-portable trap are in there too, with the citations.

  Now waiting on the census agent for the three-column table. When it reports
  I'll check three things specifically before believing any of it: that
  timed_out is zero on every grammar (a censored Sena run certifies nothing),
  whether the FUSION BROKE line appeared as a parse-call count, and whether the
  warm-repeat control fired WARMTH DOMINATES — because if a mere repeat of
  identical work gains as much at p99 as pruning does, then after-measured's p99
  isn't evidence of a pruning win at all.

✻ Sautéed for 52s

● Agent "Finish and run the census A/B" finished · 16m 30s

● Strong result, and it inverts one of my conclusions — so let me verify it
  myself rather than relay it. Indonesian is cheap to re-run.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Verified independently, and it overturns my morning conclusion.

  My own Indonesian rerun, on the deterministic counter rather than wall time:

  ┌─────────────────────┬────────┬────────────────┬────────────────┐
  │     Indonesian      │ before │ after-modelled │ after-measured │
  ├─────────────────────┼────────┼────────────────┼────────────────┤
  │ steps/word p99      │ 33     │ 33             │ 5              │
  ├─────────────────────┼────────┼────────────────┼────────────────┤
  │ steps/word max      │ 158    │ 104            │ 16             │
  ├─────────────────────┼────────┼────────────────┼────────────────┤
  │ confirm ms/word p99 │ 2.115  │ 2.115          │ 1.479          │
  └─────────────────────┴────────┴────────────────┴────────────────┘

  Indonesian is not a null result. The model said p99 steps go 33→33 (0.0%); the
  real pruned re-run gives 33→5. My "0.0% at p99, structural and permanent"
  claim this morning was wrong, and wrong for exactly the reason I flagged as a
  hypothesis: the whole-chunk-only accounting rule understated it. One word
  makes it concrete — mengamat-amati runs 8.0 ms cold, 8.28 ms on the warm
  repeat (so no cache benefit at all), and 2.84 ms pruned.

  All three grammars move the same way — measured beats modelled everywhere, so
  this morning's ceilings were floors:

  ┌────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │  grammar   │     p99 confirm: before → modelled → measured     │
  ├────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Sena       │ 348.0 → 24.3 → 15.6 ms                            │
  ├────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Amharic    │ 1446.3 → 985.1 → 651.5 ms (−30.8% becomes −55.0%) │
  ├────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Indonesian │ 2.115 → 2.115 → 1.479 ms                          │
  └────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

  The fusion-break risk I raised did not materialize — the opposite happened. No
  grammar printed the FUSION BROKE line. Sena's chunks go 8605 → 981, but it
  had 1343 surviving chunks, so pruning re-fused surviving candidates into ~360
  fewer parse calls than even the survivors needed separately. That's why
  measured beats modelled: pruning doesn't just narrow chunks, it changes which
  chunks exist.

  That also refines the earlier code investigation. Its mechanism was right — a
  chunk's cost is fixed by root_key/union_rules before membership re-enters —
  but its conclusion ("bounded by RULE_UNION_SLACK, so small") was wrong,
  because re-grouping operates on which chunks form at all, not just how wide
  their unions get.

  The warm-repeat control never fired WARMTH DOMINATES: warmth alone moves
  Indonesian's p99 −3.4% against pruning's −30.1%, Sena's −1.9% against −95.5%.
  No STEPS NONDETERMINISM anywhere, and timed_out = 0 on all three runs.

  One honest caveat on precision: the agent got Indonesian p99 −11.6% where my
  rerun got −30.1%. At n=117, p99 is essentially the second-worst word, so
  wall-time percentiles there are noisy. The deterministic steps column is the
  number to trust within a grammar — and it moved 33→5.

  Committed as 918f8642, hygiene clean, one violation fixed. Next I'll fold
  these into the plan doc, then dispatch the surface-consistency measurement
  that sizes how much of this now-larger ceiling is actually reachable.

✻ Cooked for 1h 46m 38s

❯ Ok - we got a big win - this really works.  Let's land this on main and then  
  think about the next things we want to work on.                               

● Landing it. One thing to be precise about first, because it changes what
  "works" means: the measurement works and the ceiling is real and bigger than
  we thought. The filter itself still rejects zero candidates on every grammar —
  every TraceFact arrives Deferred. So what we're landing is a validated
  instrument plus the evidence that the payoff is worth chasing, not a working
  filter.

  Let me see what's actually on the branches.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Both branches are strictly ahead of main with nothing behind, so both are
  clean fast-forwards today. But I'm not merging 27 commits of new code onto
  main without running the gates first.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● All 13 PowerShell suites green — 161 tests, 0 failed — so
  tooling-disk-recovery is ready.

  I'll land in the order that avoids a wasted re-verification:
  candidate-filter-first merges first (its Rust suite is running now against the
  current tree), then tooling-disk-recovery rebases onto the new main and
  re-runs — its 161 tests need no cargo and take about a minute, whereas
  re-running the Rust suite after a rebase would cost another full build. The
  two branches touch disjoint files, so that rebase should be trivial.
  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Still compiling the test profile from scratch — I'll report the result when it
  lands rather than poll it.

  Meanwhile, what's worth doing next. Five candidates, and one new lead the
  measurement just handed us:

  My recommendation: size the reachable fraction first, before building 
  anything. We now know the ceiling is large and that the filter's entire input
  is (surface, morpheme ids, root index, static grammar). Two check classes are
  expressible from that; one — co-occurrence — was already refuted at ~3% of
  failing time. So the whole program rests on whether surface consistency ("does
  any allomorph/rule assignment exist that could produce this surface from this
  morpheme sequence?") reaches most of Sena's ceiling. That's a measurement,
  not a build, and it decides whether the next step is a cheap lookup table or
  emitter surgery with a six-orders-of-magnitude regression history. Building
  the generator before knowing this risks building the wrong thing well.

  Then, conditional on that: the generator's cheap path — a static table keyed
  on MorphemeId giving Known(TraceRole), plus Known slot/stratum for rules
  referenced at exactly one site. No tape change. This is what finally moves
  achieved saving off 0.00%.

  Independent of both, and worth running in parallel: task 16's evidence-layer
  defects. Three verified vacuous assertions, including one where deleting a
  branch lets a MalformedIdentity proof verify against a legitimate rootless
  candidate. These sit under everything else we'll measure.

  Then: Mbugwe and Aweti, which contribute nothing today and are the two most
  differently-shaped grammars — so today's "1 of 3 decisive" claim rests on a
  sample missing exactly the cases most likely to break it. And
  ExploreMode::Flat, now the stronger axis for Sena and the only axis-2 instance
  still standing after circumfix died.

  The new lead, honestly caveated: pruning collapsed Sena's 1343 surviving
  chunks into 981 actual parse calls. My first instinct was that this exposes
  ~27% of parse calls as waste recoverable without any filter — but that's wrong
  on reflection: the re-fusion is caused by removing the doomed candidates,
  since they force their own grouping while present. What it does give us is
  real data for the RULE_UNION_SLACK tradeoff, which currently sits at 3 with a
  documented hazard (a broadened union made kutongera 3–5× slower). Worth a
  look, not a free win.

  Tell me if you'd rather go straight at the generator — the argument for it is
  that a working filter, even a weak one, converts 0.00% into a real number and
  makes everything downstream concrete.

✻ Cooked for 2m 17s

❯ /goal get to a full fst->filter->HC pipeline working and refined.  Use up to  
2 sonnet simultaneous subagents and worktrees as you work through the issues.   
grill-with-docs as needed                                                       
  ⎿  Goal set: get to a full fst->filter->HC pipeline working and refined.  Use
     up to 2 sonnet simultaneous subagents and worktrees as you work through the
     issues.  grill-with-docs as needed

● Goal acknowledged: a working, refined FST→filter→HC pipeline. That makes the
  generator the critical path — achieved saving must move off 0.00%. Landing
  first, then two Sonnet agents in separate worktrees.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Tests still compiling the workspace. Creating the two worktrees now, both
  based on candidate-filter-first so the agents build on today's landed work.

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Both worktrees created off 918f8642. Note they lack the private corpora
  (gitignored, not copied), so agents must point at the shared root. Dispatching
  both now.

● 2 background agents launched (↓ to manage)
   ├ Build the Known-fact generator
   └ Size the reachable ceiling fraction

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Test suite still compiling; with two agents now also queuing for slots, I'll
  let it run rather than poll. Meanwhile the remaining durable record from today
  — doc-only, so it won't disturb the build.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\candidate-filter\docs\supe
        rpowers\plans\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-first.md)
  ⎿  Added 34 lines, removed 5 lines
      113  step share against a 41.2% wall share. Decide on measured time
           ; use steps only within one grammar.
      114  This is the "report time, not percentages" rule one level down
           , and it caught a real misreading.
      115  
      116 -**Indonesian's null result is caused by the whole-chunk-only a
          -ccounting rule, and may be an artifact                        
      117 -of it.** Its removable chunks are 80% singletons with a median
          - of 1 step, while surviving chunks reach                      
      118 -104; the tail therefore lives entirely in chunks holding at le
          -ast one HC survivor. Whether narrowing                        
      119 -a chunk (rather than eliminating it whole) recovers work is th
          -e open question this document already                         
      120 -refused to claim — it depends on whether the fused reparse cos
          -t is per-candidate or per-root-set.                           
      116 +**Indonesian's null result WAS an artifact of the whole-chunk-
          +only accounting rule.** Confirmed the                         
      117 +same day by replacing the model with a real pruned re-run (`91
          +8f8642`): the census had computed                             
      118 +"after" by deleting wholly-doomed chunks and copying every sur
          +viving chunk's cost through unchanged,                        
      119 +an assumption `shadow.rs` states outright. A genuine second `c
          +onfirm_batch_attributed` call over only                       
      120 +the non-doomed candidates gives, on the deterministic step cou
          +nter:                                                         
      121  
      122 +| Indonesian | before | after-modelled | after-measured |     
      123 +|---|---|---|---|                                             
      124 +| steps/word p99 | 33 | 33 | **5** |                          
      125 +| steps/word max | 158 | 104 | **16** |                       
      126 +                                                              
      127 +The model said the tail could not move at all; it moves 33 → 5
          +. **Every grammar's measured result                           
      128 +beats its modelled one**, so the ceilings above are floors, no
          +t estimates:                                                  
      129 +                                                              
      130 +| grammar | p99 confirm ms: before → modelled → measured |    
      131 +|---|---|                                                     
      132 +| Sena | 348.0 → 24.3 → **15.6** |                            
      133 +| Amharic | 1446.3 → 985.1 → **651.5** (−30.8% becomes −55.0%)
          + |                                                            
      134 +| Indonesian | 2.115 → 2.115 → **1.479** |                    
      135 +                                                              
      136 +**The mechanism is re-grouping, not within-chunk narrowing.** 
          +Sena has 1343 surviving chunks but the                        
      137 +pruned run makes only 981 parse calls: removing the doomed can
          +didates lets surviving candidates                             
      138 +re-fuse into ~360 fewer calls than the survivors needed while 
          +the doomed ones were still forcing                            
      139 +their own grouping. So a chunk's cost is indeed fixed by its `
          +root_key`/`union_rules` before                                
      140 +membership re-enters — but pruning changes *which chunks exist
          +*, which the slack bound does not cap.                        
      141 +The feared opposite (pruning splitting a cross-root-set fusion
          + and costing MORE parse calls) never                          
      142 +occurred: no grammar printed the FUSION BROKE line.           
      143 +                                                              
      144 +Controls: a third call repeating the full run's exact work pri
          +ces cache warmth directly, and warmth                         
      145 +never dominated (Indonesian p99 −3.4% warmth against −30.1% pr
          +uning; Sena −1.9% against −95.5%). No                         
      146 +step-count nondeterminism appeared, and `timed_out` was 0 on a
          +ll three grammars. Caveat on precision:                       
      147 +at n=117 Indonesian's p99 is effectively its second-worst word
          +, and two runs of the same measurement                        
      148 +gave −11.6% and −30.1%; treat wall-time percentiles there as n
          +oisy and prefer the step counter within                       
      149 +a grammar.                                                    
      150 +                                                              
      151  **Axis 2 is now the stronger axis for Sena, on this evidence.*
           * Once the filter works, the proposer
      152  dominates: `propose` p99 24.875 ms against filtered confirm p9
           9 24.557 ms, and means of 15.399 against
      153  2.239. Sena's FST emits ~178 candidates/word at 98.1% empty bu
           ckets. Confirm-side headroom on Sena is

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Two Sonnet agents are running in dedicated worktrees off 918f8642, and the
  record is committed.

  Agent 1 — the generator (filter-generator): builds the static grammar-level
  fact table that finally emits Known facts, with the soundness rule that a fact
  is only Known when it's unambiguous — role only if every allomorph of a
  morpheme classifies the same, slot/stratum only for rules referenced at
  exactly one site. Multi-sited stays Deferred. It also builds the gate that
  matters most: assert the filter's rejected set is a subset of what HC rejects.
  Discarding a candidate HC would accept is the one unacceptable failure, and I
  told it that if the subset check fails, that's the headline finding and not
  something to tune around. I also warned it that StructuralTransitionPass may
  be vacuous under ExploreMode::Pruned — and that reporting zero rejections
  honestly beats manufacturing them by weakening soundness.

  Agent 2 — reachability (filter-reach): measures what share of the removable
  work each expressible check class can actually reach, weighted by confirmation
  cost rather than candidate count, since the whole lesson so far is that
  killable candidates aren't deletable work.

  The plan doc now records the correction properly (5f3332b3): today's ceilings
  were floors, Indonesian was never a null result, and the mechanism is
  re-grouping rather than within-chunk narrowing — Sena's 1343 surviving chunks
  collapse to 981 parse calls because pruning changes which chunks exist, which
  the slack bound doesn't cap.

  The merge to main is still gated on the Rust suite, which is compiling the
  test profile from scratch. I'm not merging 28 commits on a green PowerShell
  suite alone — the 161 tooling tests pass, but they don't touch a line of the
  Rust filter code. Once it's green: candidate-filter-first fast-forwards, then
  tooling-disk-recovery rebases onto the new tip and re-runs its (cheap,
  cargo-free) suite before landing.

✻ Baked for 4m 7s

● Agent "Size the reachable ceiling fraction" finished · 31m 46s

● Third time today an agent has stalled on a self-spawned background job,
  despite an explicit instruction against it. Checking both its job and the test
  run.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Rust suite is green: 1986 tests run, 1986 passed, 161 skipped. Merging now.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Stop — the main checkout has uncommitted modifications, including analyzer.rs
  and morphotactics.rs, which the incoming commits also touch. A fast-forward
  would refuse or clobber that work, and I've destroyed unstaged work this way
  before. Checking the overlap before touching anything.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● The merge is blocked, and for a reason I won't work around unilaterally.

  Exactly one file overlaps: rust/crates/pg-foma/src/morphotactics.rs is
  modified in the main checkout and changed by the incoming commits, so a
  fast-forward would refuse or overwrite it. The other local edits (analyzer.rs
  +59 lines, corpus-manifest.json +20, the machine submodule pointer) aren't
  touched by the incoming set. That uncommitted work isn't mine — it belongs to
  whoever is working in the main checkout — and stashing is ruled out here
  because the stash is shared across worktrees.

  Taking a non-destructive backup rather than touching it:

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)
● The overlapping change is someone's active Mbugwe work — raising the
  enumeration budgets (entry 200k→500k, probe 3M→10M) for depth-5 composites.
  That's live work by whoever holds the main checkout, and it's their call, not
  mine. I've backed up all uncommitted tracked changes to a patch in the
  scratchpad regardless.

  Worth flagging: that recalibration may be directly relevant to why Mbugwe
  yields zero candidates in our census (task 23) — if enumeration was hitting
  the old budget, the census would see nothing to filter.

  The merge needs your decision, and it isn't on the critical path for the
  pipeline goal, so I'm not blocking on it. Options: whoever owns the main
  checkout commits their morphotactics.rs change and I fast-forward cleanly; or
  I land the branch and let them re-apply the budget change on top; or we defer
  the merge entirely until their work lands.

  Continuing the goal work meanwhile.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Agent A is building exactly the right things — facts.rs, produce.rs, and
  candidate_filter_recall_safety_gate.rs (the subset check that a filter
  rejection must never exceed what HC rejects). Agent B's census job is queued
  behind A's build for a slot; I'll resume B once it clears rather than let it
  sit on a watcher.

  Status toward the goal:

  ┌──────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │          piece           │                    state                     │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ FST proposer →           │ working                                      │
  │ candidates               │                                              │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ candidates → filter      │ wired, shadow mode                           │
  │ pipeline                 │                                              │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ filter → Known facts     │ agent A building now — the blocker           │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ filter → HC confirm      │ wired; measured ceiling large                │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ recall safety gate       │ agent A building                             │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ reachability sizing      │ agent B, queued on a build slot              │
  ├──────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ land on main             │ blocked on your call (someone's live Mbugwe  │
  │                          │ budget work)                                 │
  └──────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────────────────────┘

  The one number that defines "working" is still 0.00% — no pass has ever
  rejected a candidate. Everything else measured today says the payoff is there
  once it does: Sena p99 confirm 348 → 15.6 ms at a filter cost of 0.678 ms.

  I'll grill agent A's generator hard when it reports, because it's the piece
  where a mistake is expensive: a filter that discards a valid parse is the one
  failure mode HC can't rescue us from, and it would show up as silently missing
  analyses rather than as an error. The recall-subset gate is what I'll check
  first, and I'll verify it by re-running it with the fix bypassed — a gate that
  passes with its own subject reverted has caught nothing.

✻ Baked for 2m 26s

● Agent "Build the Known-fact generator" finished · 34m 48s

● Both agents have now stalled the same way. Checking their state and jobs
  directly.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Agent B's build finished (2m23s); agent A's is still compiling. Agent B also
  left a duplicate job queued for a slot — killing that so it doesn't contend,
  then resuming B.

● Stop Task
  ⎿  cd "C:/Users/johnm/Documents/repos/PanGloss/.claude/worktrees/filter-r
     each"; $env:PANGLOSS_CORPUS_ROOT =
     "C:\Users\johnm\Documents\repos\PanGloss\samples\data";… · stopped
  ⎿  Message queued for delivery to aab0fe295c2ea283c at its next tool 
     round.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)
  ⎿  Agent "a18ca98bf9a114fa8" was stopped (completed); resumed it in the 
     background with your message. You'll be notified when it finishes. 
     Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-johnm-Docume
     nts-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product\bd622822-
     b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\a18ca98bf9a114fa8.output

● Both agents resumed with the background-job habit corrected and a duplicate
  build killed that was contending for a slot.

  The instruction that matters most is on agent A: prove the recall gate can 
  fail before reporting it passes. Deliberately make a pass reject something it
  shouldn't, confirm the gate fails, revert, and report exactly what was broken.
  I've been bitten by this pattern before — agents shipping regression gates
  that pass with their own fix reverted — and here it's the difference between a
  real safety net and a decorative one. A filter that discards a valid parse
  produces silently missing analyses, not an error, so this is the failure we
  cannot detect after the fact.

  Where the goal stands: the FST→filter→HC chain is wired end to end and
  measured; the missing link is the generator emitting Known facts, which agent
  A is compiling now. Achieved saving is still 0.00% — that's the number that
  has to move for "working."

  Two things need you, neither blocking:

  The merge. candidate-filter-first is green (1986/1986 Rust tests, plus 161
  tooling tests on the other branch) but can't fast-forward because the main
  checkout has an uncommitted morphotactics.rs change — someone raising the
  Mbugwe enumeration budgets to 500k/10M. I've backed up all uncommitted tracked
  work to a patch and touched nothing. Your call whether that owner commits
  first, or I land and let them re-apply.

  A possible connection worth checking: that same budget work may explain why
  Mbugwe yields zero candidates in our census. If enumeration was hitting the
  old 200k ceiling, the census would see nothing to filter — which would make
  task 23's "census defect" actually a budget interaction, and would mean one of
  our two unmeasured grammars is measurable sooner than I assumed.

✻ Sautéed for 1m 35s

● Agent "Build the Known-fact generator" failed: Agent terminated early due to
an API error: You've hit your session limit · resets 3pm (America/New_York)
  ⎿  You've hit your session limit · resets 3pm (America/New_York)
     /usage-credits to request more usage from your admin.

✻ Cooked for 0s

● Agent "Size the reachable ceiling fraction" failed: Agent terminated early due
to an API error: You've hit your session limit · resets 3pm (America/New_York)
  ⎿  You've hit your session limit · resets 3pm (America/New_York)
     /usage-credits to request more usage from your admin.

✻ Cooked for 59m 59s

● Background command "Run full test suite on candidate-filter-first" completed
(exit code 0)
  ⎿  You've hit your session limit · resets 3pm (America/New_York)
     /usage-credits to request more usage from your admin.

✻ Brewed for 0s

❯ keep going                                                                    

● Both agents hit the session limit (resets 3pm ET). Agent A was
  mid-verification — it had deliberately broken the recall gate and was checking
  the revert — so the first thing to establish is whether it left the tree in a
  broken state.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Work is uncommitted but intact. Let me read what it actually built before
  running anything.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)
● produce.rs is sound in shape — additive, leaves legacy untouched, and defers
  everything it has no source for. The soundness lives in facts.rs.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Soundness shape is right: Known only on unanimity, out-of-range defers rather
  than panics, unowned morphemes stay Deferred, and unmapped roles become
  distinct opaque Other(n) ids so no pass can mistake a circumfix for a prefix.
  The load-bearing piece is unique_slot_of — if that returns a slot when a rule
  actually has several sites, the whole safety argument collapses.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Two things to verify — and one is a potential soundness hole. rule_sites is
  built with filter_map(|site| sites.get(site).copied()), which silently drops
  any site missing from sites. If a rule has two sites and one is dropped, the
  vec has length 1 and unique_slot_of returns Some — asserting a unique slot for
  a multi-sited rule. That would break recall exactly where it's hardest to
  notice.

  Read 1 file, ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● allomorphs_of already exists (emit.rs:517, pub(crate)), so no emitter change
  was needed — good.

  The soundness hole is real. sites skips any template index past u16 or slot
  index past u8 (continue at lines 117 and 123), so a template with more than
  255 slots would have its later slots absent from sites. A rule sited at both
  slot 3 and slot 300 would then have its list silently shrunk to one entry and
  be reported as uniquely sited. Narrow, but it's the exact failure that
  discards valid parses, and our standing rule is to design for full-scale
  grammars rather than justify by what reference grammars happen to contain.
  Fixing it to fail closed:

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\filter-generator\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\src\candidate_filter\index.rs)
  ⎿  Added 6 lines, removed 2 lines
      135              }
      136          }
      137  
      138 +        // A site this index cannot represent (template past u
          +16, slot past u8) is dropped above, so                        
      139 +        // a partial translation would shrink a multi-sited ru
          +le's list to one and let                                      
      140 +        // `unique_slot_of` call it uniquely sited. Losing any
          + site forfeits the whole rule instead.                        
      141          let rule_sites: BTreeMap<MRuleId, Vec<TraceSlotId>> = 
           rule_site_pairs
      142              .into_iter()
      143              .map(|(rule, pairs)| {
      141 -                let ids = pairs                               
      144 +                let ids: Vec<TraceSlotId> = pairs             
      145                      .iter()
      146                      .filter_map(|site| sites.get(site).copied(
           ))
      147                      .collect();
      145 -                (rule, ids)                                   
      148 +                let complete = ids.len() == pairs.len();      
      149 +                (rule, if complete { ids } else { Vec::new() }
          +)                                                             
      150              })
      151              .collect();
      152  

● Now the recall gate itself — whether it's real, and whether the agent's
  deliberate break was reverted.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Gate is real: it uses the actual FST proposer (analyzer.propose_words),
  collects rejected ordinals, and asserts they're a subset of the empty-bucket
  set. Let me confirm the agent's deliberate break isn't still in place before
  running anything.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

❯ use sonnet subagents to do the work, you verify                               

● No sabotage left in the tree — the only "deliberate" matches are legitimate
  prose. The diffs are clean and revertible.

  Handing back to Sonnet as you asked; both agents hit the session limit, so I'm
  resuming them (which preserves their context) rather than starting fresh
  ones.
  ⎿  Agent "a18ca98bf9a114fa8" had no active task; resumed from transcript 
     in the background with your message. You'll be notified when it 
     finishes. Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-jo
     hnm-Documents-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product
     \bd622822-b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\a18ca98bf9a114fa8.output
  ⎿  Agent "aab0fe295c2ea283c" had no active task; resumed from transcript 
     in the background with your message. You'll be notified when it 
     finishes. Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-jo
     hnm-Documents-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product
     \bd622822-b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\aab0fe295c2ea283c.output

● Both agents resumed with their context intact — back to them doing the work,
  me verifying.

  What my review of the generator found while they were out. The design is
  sound: produce.rs is purely additive and leaves legacy untouched, facts.rs
  marks a fact Known only on unanimity across allomorphs, unowned morphemes stay
  Deferred, and unmapped roles become distinct opaque Other(n) ids so no pass
  can mistake a circumfix for a prefix. It also uses the real FST proposer,
  which quietly closes task 19.

  One real soundness hole, which I fixed. FilterIndex::build translated a rule's
  sites with filter_map(|site| sites.get(site).copied()), and sites skips
  template indices past u16 and slot indices past u8. A rule sited at both slot
  3 and slot 300 of one template would have had its list silently shrunk to a
  single entry, and unique_slot_of would then have declared it uniquely sited —
  an unsound Known slot fact. That's precisely the failure that discards a valid
  parse, and it would surface as silently missing analyses rather than an
  error. It now forfeits the whole rule when any site fails to translate. Narrow
  in practice, but "no reference grammar has 256 slots" is not an argument we
  accept here.

  I've flagged that fix to the agent as behaviour to keep, and told it I have
  not compiled the edit — it needs to verify, not assume.

  The step I'm holding it to before I believe anything: break the recall gate 
  and watch it fail. It died mid-way through exactly that check. Until a gate
  has been seen to fail, it has proven nothing, and this is the one gate
  standing between us and silently dropping valid parses.

  Still open for you, unchanged: the merge to main is green on both branches but
  blocked by the uncommitted Mbugwe budget work in the main checkout (backed up
  to a patch, untouched).

✻ Baked for 2m 53s

❯ Keep the Mbugwe patch - this work is intended directly to address the Mbugwe  
  challenges, and we will want to restes as it begins to land.                  

● Understood — that budget work is aimed at the same Mbugwe problem this filter
  work is meant to help with, so it stays. Let me check whether the incoming
  change even touches the same region, which decides whether landing is safe at
  all.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

❯ and merge onto main.                                                          

● Confirmed disjoint: the incoming change adds slot_sites_of/template_stratum
  around line 452; the Mbugwe budget constants are at ~134–144. Different
  regions of the same file, so this is safe to sequence. Merging with the patch
  preserved:

  Merged candidate-filter-first (ctrl+o to expand)

● main is now at 5f3332b3 — 27 commits landed, and the Mbugwe patch is intact
  and still uncommitted (budgets 500_000 / 10_000_000 at lines 139–140,
  alongside the new slot_sites_of at 458). The other local edits — analyzer.rs,
  corpus-manifest.json, the machine pointer — were never touched.

  Now the tooling branch, which needs a rebase onto the new tip before it can
  fast-forward.

  Rebased onto main (ctrl+o to expand)

● Rebase was clean with no conflicts. Re-running its suite against the new base
  before landing — a rebase that merges textually can still fail to work, which
  bit me earlier today.
  Merged tooling-disk-recovery, ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Both branches are on main, linear history, no merge commits:

  ┌────────────────────────┬─────────┬───────────────────────────────────────┐
  │                        │ commits │              verified by              │
  ├────────────────────────┼─────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ candidate-filter-first │ 27      │ 1986/1986 Rust tests                  │
  ├────────────────────────┼─────────┼───────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ tooling-disk-recovery  │ 6       │ 161/161 tooling tests, re-run         │
  │                        │         │ post-rebase                           │
  └────────────────────────┴─────────┴───────────────────────────────────────┘

  main: a57e7ad2 → 08dc8993.

  Your Mbugwe patch survived intact — budgets still at 500_000 / 10_000_000,
  still uncommitted and ready for you to keep iterating on. So are analyzer.rs,
  the machine pointer, corpus-manifest.json, and
  strategy_aware_capability_gate.rs. I checked before the second merge that the
  tooling branch touched only disjoint files, and kept a patch backup
  throughout.

  One side effect worth knowing: the find-scope hook is now on main, so it
  protects every worktree rather than only the one it was built in — that was
  the limitation I flagged earlier, and landing fixed it.

  On the Mbugwe connection you're pointing at: the census currently sees zero
  candidates for Mbugwe, which I'd filed as a census defect. If enumeration was
  hitting the old 200k entry ceiling, that's not a defect at all — it's the
  budget, and your raise to 500k may make Mbugwe measurable. That's worth
  re-testing as soon as the generator lands, since Mbugwe and Aweti are the two
  grammars whose shapes differ most from the three we've measured, and today's
  "helps 1 of 3 decisively" claim rests on a sample that excludes exactly them.

  Agents are working: the generator (with my unique_slot_of soundness fix
  flagged to it) and the reachability measurement. The number that decides
  whether the pipeline "works" is still 0.00% achieved saving — and the gate I
  won't accept without seeing fail is the recall check, since a filter that
  discards a valid parse produces silently missing analyses rather than an
  error.

✻ Worked for 3m 2s

● Agent "Size the reachable ceiling fraction" finished · 8m 17s

● Strong report, and it found its own recall bug before trusting any number —
  the boundary markers (+, ^0, *0, .) and archiphoneme letters were flagging
  membaca, an HC-confirmed candidate, as infeasible. That's precisely the
  failure mode that discards valid parses, caught by checking rather than
  assuming.

  Let me verify the load-bearing claim myself, since the whole (a)-is-dead
  conclusion rests on it.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Verified: zero co-occurrence constructs of any kind in all three grammars. The
  (a) = 0% measurement is real.

  But two things change the conclusion, and both matter.

  First, "co-occurrence is dead" overreaches in exactly the way this repo 
  forbids. The finding is that all three grammars declare no such rules, so the
  check is vacuous on them. That is not the same as the check being worthless —
  it's unmeasured on any grammar that does declare them. Our standing rule is
  that "zero uses in reference grammars" is never a justification, and the
  2026-07-17 NO-GO inherits the same limitation since it was measured on these
  same corpora. The honest statement: vacuous on our sample, value unknown in
  general.

  Second, and more consequential: the reach fractions were computed with the 
  accounting we disproved this morning. They use shadow::chunk_is_removable —
  the whole-chunk model that Indonesian showed said 0.0% at p99 where a real
  pruned re-run measured −30%. So (b)'s work-weighted reach (8.8% Indonesian,
  16–20% Sena) is a floor, not a verdict, and the recommendation not to expect
  (b) to help Sena's tail rests on the conservative model rather than a
  measurement. The ratio may hold since numerator and denominator share the
  model — but Indonesian is the proof that it can fail badly.

  The decisive test is cheap because both pieces already exist: make (b) a real
  pass, then measure it with the three-column census.
  ⎿  Agent "aab0fe295c2ea283c" had no active task; resumed from transcript 
     in the background with your message. You'll be notified when it 
     finishes. Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-jo
     hnm-Documents-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product
     \bd622822-b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\aab0fe295c2ea283c.output

● Recorded with both caveats attached, so the numbers can't travel without them.

  Where the goal stands. The pipeline is landed on main and measured end to end;
  what's missing is a pass that actually fires. Two are converging on that now:

  - Generator (filter-generator): static fact table so the structural passes can
  reject at all. My unique_slot_of soundness fix is flagged to it, and it owes
  me a recall gate that has been seen to fail.
  - Surface consistency (filter-reach): a check that already demonstrably
  identifies dead candidates — 80.7% of Amharic's doomed set by count, 77.4% by
  work — now being promoted from a census classifier into a real pass with a
  rejection proof, then measured with the three-column census.

  Surface consistency is the more likely of the two to move achieved saving off
  0.00% first, because it doesn't depend on facts the tape can't carry — it
  quantifies existentially over the static grammar instead.

  The honest read on scope: Amharic looks genuinely winnable this way (~39% of
  its total confirm work). Sena, which has both the largest ceiling and the
  worst tail, has ~75–80% of its removable work in "neither" — reachable by no
  static check. If that survives real measurement, Sena's tail needs emitter
  surgery, and this cheap path tops out at Amharic-shaped grammars. I'm not
  treating that as settled yet, precisely because the same conservative
  accounting told us this morning that Indonesian's tail could not move at all,
  and it moved 33→5.

✻ Cooked for 1m 55s

● Agent "Size the reachable ceiling fraction" finished · 20m 46s

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Both agents are alive with real uncommitted work, and 10 compiler processes
  are running — the two of them are contending for the 2 machine-wide build
  slots, which is why each foreground call keeps timing out. Blocking until the
  builds settle rather than letting them thrash:

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Ten compiler processes unchanged after eight minutes — that's either genuinely
  long LTO builds or orphans. Checking which.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Two real findings here.

  An orphaned root-scan find is burning CPU right now — PID 4960, find / -iname 
  pg-cli* -o -iname pangloss.exe, 39 minutes old, 2282 CPU-seconds, parent dead,
  writing to a pipe nobody is reading. That's the exact incident the hook was
  built to prevent, and it's stealing a core from the builds I've been waiting
  on. The hook is on main now, but these two worktrees were branched from
  candidate-filter-first before it landed, so they don't have it — a gap worth
  knowing about.

  Reaping it:

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Killed it — 2331 CPU-seconds reclaimed, no find processes remain. Note gc
  correctly refused to delete any target directory while 18 live compiler
  processes were running; that safety property held.

  Agent A's work worries me: it has survived two session-limit deaths and is
  still entirely uncommitted. Protecting it first.
  ⎿  Message queued for delivery to a18ca98bf9a114fa8 at its next tool 
     round.

● Both agents are working; I've told the generator agent to commit before
  anything else, since its work has now survived two session deaths uncommitted.

  Progress this stretch:

  - Landed on main (a57e7ad2 → 08dc8993): 33 commits across both branches,
  linear history, your Mbugwe budget patch preserved uncommitted and verified
  byte-for-byte afterward.
  - Reachability measured — the answer to what a filter can see from the tape
  alone. Co-occurrence is vacuous on all three grammars (independently verified:
  zero such constructs declared). Surface consistency reaches 77.4% of
  Amharic's removable work but only 16–20% of Sena's.
  - Killed a live 2331-CPU-second orphaned root scan that was starving the
  builds.

  Two corrections I made to the measurement agent's conclusions, both of which
  change what we'd build:

  Its "co-occurrence is dead" verdict rests on these three grammars declaring 
  none — which is the "zero uses in reference grammars" reasoning this repo
  explicitly forbids, since the grammars are small and stress grammars are
  coming. And its reach fractions use the whole-chunk model that we disproved
  this morning, so they're floors rather than verdicts; the same accounting said
  Indonesian's tail couldn't move and it moved 33→5.

  The shape of the answer forming up: Amharic looks genuinely winnable with a
  cheap, sound, no-tape-change check (~39% of its total confirm work). Sena —
  biggest ceiling, worst tail — has ~75–80% of its removable work reachable by
  no static check at all, which would put its tail in emitter-surgery territory.
  I'm holding that as provisional until it's measured with a real pruned re-run
  rather than the model.

  One gap worth noting: both agent worktrees were branched before the find-scope
  hook landed on main, so neither is protected from the failure I just cleaned
  up.

✻ Worked for 11m 46s

● Agent "Build the Known-fact generator" finished · 44m 35s

● Excellent, honest work — and the finding is more valuable than a win would
  have been.

  Verifying the committed state myself before accepting it:

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Verified independently: committed clean at ead3d4e0, no leftover fabrication
  (site_facts correctly defers via unique_slot_of), and my soundness fix
  survived.

  The generator works — and it proved both existing passes are dead weight.
  That's the most useful thing we could have learned.  ⎿  Agent "a18ca98bf9a114fa8" was stopped (completed); resumed it in the 
     background with your message. You'll be notified when it finishes. 
     Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-johnm-Docume
     nts-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product\bd622822-
     b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\a18ca98bf9a114fa8.output

● The generator landed and it produced a genuinely important negative result.

  GrammarFacts now establishes real Known role/slot/stratum facts from a static
  per-grammar table, no tape change. The recall gate is real — I required it be
  seen to fail, and it was, twice: fabricating a slot fact instead of deferring
  made it fail immediately on the Amharic word ሄደ with rejected=[0] ... 
  doomed={}, a candidate HC would have accepted. Reverted, re-ran, identical
  numbers. pg-foma 960/960. Committed at ead3d4e0, and I verified the tree
  independently.

  Achieved saving is still 0.00% — but the reason changed, and that's the 
  finding. It's no longer "facts are unestablished." The Transition pass now
  genuinely decides (31/2/12 keeps replacing universal deferral). The two
  structural passes simply cannot reject anything:

  - Ownership — pins_resolve is true for every real proposer-generated
  candidate, so it short-circuits to Keep before the placement check runs.
  - Transition — finds nothing impossible, because ExploreMode::Pruned already
  excludes illegal transitions before they're ever proposed.

  Both passes duplicate work the production path already does. That's the same
  shape as the 2026-07-16 NO-GO, now confirmed with real facts rather than
  inferred. Value can only come from a check the proposer doesn't already 
  perform — which leaves exactly two live candidates, and both are now running:

  1. Surface consistency (agent B): checks phonological feasibility the FST
  never verifies. Reaches 77.4% of Amharic's removable work.
  2. ExploreMode::Flat as a replacement for Pruned (agent A): under Flat the
  proposer emits the illegal transitions Pruned suppresses, so the pass finally
  has something to reject. This was untestable before today — the generator is
  what unlocked it.

  I've told agent A the honest framing: Sena's proposer already dominates once
  confirmation is filtered, and Flat emits more candidates. So the real question
  is whether the filter absorbs them for less than pruning costs, and the
  answer may well be no. Its recall gate also stops being vacuous under Flat,
  since the pass will reject for real — if it fails there, that's the headline
  and work stops.

✻ Sautéed for 1m 32s

❯ Are we considering any filters currently that would make FST generation       
  simpler and smaller?                                                          

● Short answer: one, and it's running right now. Let me be precise about what's
  actually in play versus what I'd be speculating about.

  Live: ExploreMode::Flat replacing ExploreMode::Pruned — agent A is measuring
  it as we speak. This is the real shrinkage lever: Flat skips the morphotactic
  automaton entirely. If the Transition pass absorbs what Flat lets through, the
  proposer stops needing to build and consult that pruning machinery at all.
  Today's generator work is what made this testable — before GrammarFacts, the
  pass couldn't decide anything, so there was nothing to absorb with.

  Dead: circumfix N×M → N+M. That was the plan's other concrete shrinkage
  instance, and it needs the halves to be separately representable, which
  requires a MorphRuleDef change. Blocked, not cheap.

  Explicitly not a shrinkage lever: surface consistency. It's a post-proposal
  check — it removes nothing from the network. Worth stating plainly so it
  doesn't get credited on this axis.

  So the honest count is one live instance out of two, which is thin. Let me
  check one candidate I noticed during the emission investigation but haven't
  verified.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● That check settles a question rather than opening one, and in a useful
  direction.

  The FST already declines to encode allomorph environments. precision.rs
  documents that v1's emitter "emits every allomorph permissively regardless of
  its declared RequiredEnvironments/ExcludedEnvironments and lets HC confirm
  prune the wrong-environment candidates," with Strip as the permanent default.
  So the "propose sloppily, let something downstream sort it out" strategy is
  already fully exploited on the environment axis — there's no precision
  machinery sitting in the network waiting to be traded away for a filter. A
  filter that checked environments would offload work from HC, but it would not
  remove a single state from the FST.

  That means FST size is now structural, and only three things make it big:

  ┌──────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────────────┐
  │         structural cost          │      can a filter take it over?      │
  ├──────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Morphotactic pruning (Pruned)    │ Yes — being measured now (Flat +     │
  │                                  │ Transition pass)                     │
  ├──────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Circumfix N×M allomorph          │ Yes in principle — blocked on a      │
  │ cross-product                    │ MorphRuleDef change                  │
  ├──────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Per-allomorph lexc entries,      │ No — the network needs surface forms │
  │ per-group slot chains            │  to match input at all               │
  └──────────────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────────────┘

  So the honest answer to your question is: one live candidate, one blocked, and
  the third isn't a candidate. That's thinner than I'd like, and the circumfix
  one looks more important than I treated it this morning — it's the only
  structural cross-product we've identified where a check could replace
  materialization, and it's sitting behind a data-model change we scoped out of
  this project.

  Why this matters more than it did yesterday: on Sena, once confirmation is
  filtered, the proposer becomes the larger half (propose p99 24.9 ms vs
  filtered confirm 24.6 ms; mean 15.4 vs 2.2). Sena's confirm-side headroom is
  nearly exhausted, so further wins there have to come from the proposer. That
  makes shrinkage the higher-value axis for exactly the grammar with the worst
  tail — and it's the axis with the fewest live options.

  If Flat pays off, that's the answer for Sena. If it doesn't, I'd argue the
  circumfix cross-product stops being out-of-scope and becomes the next thing
  worth costing out, because we'd have run out of cheap structural levers.

✻ Cogitated for 1m 10s

● Agent "Build the Known-fact generator" finished · 1h 12m 6s

● A clean, well-supported negative result — and it refutes what I told you ten 
  minutes ago. Flat is not a shrinkage lever.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Verified from source: ExploreMode is consulted in exactly one place —
  preexpand.rs:452-453, the composite pre-expansion path. Flat clones the state;
  Pruned calls next_state. That explains every number:

  - Sena never runs the composite pipeline (0 pairs probed both modes) → Flat is
  a literal no-op, byte-identical lexc.
  - Indonesian probes 457 pairs in both modes → identical.
  - Amharic goes 104,605 → 305,621 pairs probed, so it emits more material: lexc
  lines 80,405 → 153,915.

  Flat removes pruning during composite enumeration, which expands the network —
  it was never a shrink lever. The plan's framing ("measure the size and
  compile-time drop") had the direction wrong, and I repeated that error to you.
  Correcting the record:

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\filter-generator\docs\supe
        rpowers\plans\2026-08-11-candidate-filter-first.md)
  ⎿  Added 21 lines, removed 2 lines
      70  
      71  Two concrete instances, both testable with machinery that alrea
          dy exists:
      72  
      73 -- `ExploreMode::Flat` (`HC_PREEXPAND_FLAT=1`) skips the morphot
         -actic automaton entirely and is kept                           
      73 +- ~~`ExploreMode::Flat` (`HC_PREEXPAND_FLAT=1`) skips the morph
         +otactic automaton entirely and is kept                         
      74    in the source expressly for A/B measurement. Build Flat, meas
          ure the size and compile-time drop
      75    and the extra candidates, and ask whether the filter absorbs 
          them for less than pruning costs. If
      76 -  it does, `StructuralTransitionPass` replaces `ExploreMode::Pr
         -uned` rather than shadowing it.                                
      76 +  it does, `StructuralTransitionPass` replaces `ExploreMode::Pr
         +uned` rather than shadowing it.~~                              
      77 +                                                               
      78 +  **REFUTED 2026-08-12 by measurement (`d1b9490c`). Flat is not
         + a shrinkage lever; it is an                                   
      79 +  expansion lever, and this bullet had the direction backwards.
         +** `ExploreMode` is consulted in                               
      80 +  exactly one place — `preexpand.rs:452-453`, the composite pre
         +-expansion path, where `Flat` clones                           
      81 +  the chain state and `Pruned` calls `next_state`. Removing tha
         +t pruning does not save the cost of                            
      82 +  building an automaton; it *emits more material*:             
      83 +                                                               
      84 +  | grammar | composite pairs probed, Pruned → Flat | lexc line
         +s | candidates |                                               
      85 +  |---|---|---|---|                                            
      86 +  | Sena | 0 → 0 (composite pipeline never runs) | byte-identic
         +al | identical |                                               
      87 +  | Indonesian | 457 → 457 | byte-identical | identical |      
      88 +  | Amharic | 104605 → 305621 | 80405 → **153915** | identical 
         +(136/136, at 20 and 100 words) |                               
      89 +                                                               
      90 +  So for two of three grammars the flag is a hard no-op on the 
         +compiled artifact, and for the third                           
      91 +  it nearly doubles the network while proposing exactly the sam
         +e candidates on every corpus word                              
      92 +  tested. `StructuralTransitionPass` rejected nothing in either
         + mode, so the Flat variant of the                              
      93 +  recall-safety gate passes but is **not load-bearing** — its r
         +ejected set was empty, so the subset                           
      94 +  assertion never had anything to test. Timing deltas were repo
         +rted as noise, correctly: the                                  
      95 +  ordering flipped between the 20-word and 100-word runs over i
         +dentical candidate sets.                                       
      96  - Circumfix allomorphs are materialized as an N×M cross product
           at emit time. A partner-agreement
      97    check makes N+M viable. The agreement mechanism is only *need
          ed* once materialization stops, which
      98    is exactly why it looks worthless while the cross product rem
          ains.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Correction to what I told you: there are now zero live FST-shrinkage 
  candidates.

  ExploreMode::Flat is refuted as a shrinkage lever, and the plan had the
  direction backwards — I repeated that error rather than checking it. The
  mechanism is unambiguous: ExploreMode is read in exactly one place
  (preexpand.rs:452-453), and dropping the pruning doesn't save building an
  automaton, it emits more material.

  ┌────────────┬────────────────────────┬─────────────────┬─────────────────┐
  │  grammar   │   composite pairs,     │   lexc lines    │   candidates    │
  │            │     Pruned → Flat      │                 │                 │
  ├────────────┼────────────────────────┼─────────────────┼─────────────────┤
  │ Sena       │ 0 → 0 (pipeline never  │ byte-identical  │ identical       │
  │            │ runs)                  │                 │                 │
  ├────────────┼────────────────────────┼─────────────────┼─────────────────┤
  │ Indonesian │ 457 → 457              │ byte-identical  │ identical       │
  ├────────────┼────────────────────────┼─────────────────┼─────────────────┤
  │ Amharic    │ 104,605 → 305,621      │ 80,405 →        │ identical       │
  │            │                        │ 153,915         │ (136/136)       │
  └────────────┴────────────────────────┴─────────────────┴─────────────────┘

  For two of three grammars the flag does nothing to the artifact; for the third
  it nearly doubles the network and still proposes exactly the same candidates
  on every word tested. The agent also flagged, correctly and without prompting,
  that its Flat recall gate passes but isn't load-bearing — the rejected set
  was empty, so the subset assertion had nothing to test — and that the timing
  deltas were noise, evidenced by the ordering flipping between the 20- and
  100-word runs.

  So the axis-2 scoreboard is now: Flat refuted, circumfix blocked on a
  MorphRuleDef change, per-allomorph entries not a candidate at all. Nothing 
  live.

  Which makes the circumfix cross-product the only structural shrinkage
  opportunity we've identified — and I notice this repo already has
  cover-circumfix-cross-product-and-infix-drop staged in openspec, with this
  very worktree named for it. That work may matter more to the filter program
  than either of us assumed this morning: it's the one place where a
  partner-agreement check could replace an N×M materialization, and it's exactly
  the direction you were asking about.

  Two things still running toward "working": agent B's surface-consistency pass
  — now the only remaining path to a nonzero rejection, since both structural
  passes are proven vacuous — and the standing question of whether Amharic's
  ~39% of confirm work survives real measurement.

◯ Goal not yet met… continuing (ctrl+o to expand)

● Correct — the goal isn't met. Let me check on the one path that can still
  produce a nonzero rejection.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Agent B has groundwork in decision.rs/pipeline.rs but no pass file yet, and
  it's idle. Driving it to the minimum that makes the pipeline actually work —
  one grammar, real rejections, gate non-vacuous.
  ⎿  Agent "aab0fe295c2ea283c" had no active task; resumed from transcript 
     in the background with your message. You'll be notified when it 
     finishes. Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-jo
     hnm-Documents-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product
     \bd622822-b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\aab0fe295c2ea283c.output

● Using the second agent slot on the thing that becomes load-bearing the moment
  agent B succeeds.
  ⎿  Agent "a18ca98bf9a114fa8" had no active task; resumed from transcript 
     in the background with your message. You'll be notified when it 
     finishes. Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-jo
     hnm-Documents-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product
     \bd622822-b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\a18ca98bf9a114fa8.output

● Both agent slots are working the two things that stand between us and a
  working pipeline.

  Agent B — the surface-consistency pass. Now the only remaining path to a
  nonzero rejection anywhere in the system, since both structural passes are
  proven vacuous and Flat is refuted. I've scoped it to a minimum definition of
  done: Amharic first (80.7% of its doomed candidates are surface-detectable,
  against Indonesian's 8.8% by work), a rejection proof from the closed
  vocabulary, and a recall gate that asserts the rejected set is non-empty as
  well as a subset of doomed. That non-empty requirement is deliberate — agent
  A's Flat gate passed while proving nothing precisely because its rejected set
  was empty, and that trap must not repeat.

  Agent A — the evidence layer, which is well-timed rather than housekeeping.
  Every rejection to date has been zero, so the recording and post-hoc
  verification path has never run against a real proof. It has three known
  defects, all of them assertions that have never been seen to fail:
  verify_all's multi-record path (passes even mutated to .take(1)),
  recorded_rejections silently verifying only a prefix once the bounded ledger
  saturates — which bites exactly at corpus scale, where we're headed — and
  root_position_is_possible's -1 branch, whose deletion lets a MalformedIdentity
  proof verify against a legitimate rootless candidate. Same standard I held it
  to on the recall gate: prove each new test fails with the fix reverted.

  Honest status against the goal: the pipeline is wired, landed on main, and
  measured end to end, but achieved saving is still 0.00% and I'm not calling
  that "working." Today established the ceiling is real and large (Sena p99 348
  → 15.6 ms), that the filter is effectively free, and — through two rigorous
  negative results — exactly which paths cannot produce it. What's missing is
  one pass that rejects something the proposer doesn't already reject.
✻ Sautéed for 3m 13s

● Agent "Size the reachable ceiling fraction" finished · 25m 20s

● Fifth stall on a self-spawned job. Checking what it actually has.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● The pass exists — surface_consistency.rs, 9.7KB, wired into passes/mod.rs,
  with tests modified. It's stalled on a compile it backgrounded. Taking it
  over; verification is my job regardless.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● While that compiles, reviewing the pass itself — the soundness argument is
  what matters most here.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● This pass has a soundness risk I want to test before anything else, and it's
  testable with a specific word.

  The check rejects when no allomorph combination's literal characters fit
  inside the surface's character multiset. That's only sound if phonological
  rules never delete or substitute segments — and deletion is exactly what
  Indonesian nasal substitution does. meN- + pukul → memukul, where the root's p
  disappears. If the grammar models that with a phonological rule rather than a
  root allomorph, the check will demand a p the surface doesn't have and reject
  a candidate HC confirms.

  From this morning's census, memukul had 1 candidate and 0 empty buckets — HC
  accepted it. So this is a concrete, falsifiable prediction of a recall
  violation.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Confirmed the hazard: pukul has exactly one allomorph, PhoneticShape = 
  "pukul". No ukul variant.

  So the p in memukul is deleted by a phonological rule, not selected away by an
  allomorph. The check will therefore demand a p that the surface doesn't
  contain, find no fitting combination, and reject — while HC confirms that
  candidate.

  The pass is unsound as written, and the reason is structural rather than a
  patchable special case: character-multiset containment is only valid if
  phonology never deletes or substitutes segments, and deletion is precisely
  what these rules do. The membaca bug the agent found and patched was the same
  failure surfacing through archiphoneme notation; excluding notation characters
  fixed one symptom, not the premise.

  This also means the 80.7% / 77.4% reach figures don't yet support the pass:
  that classification ran only over candidates HC rejects, so it never measured
  false positives against the accepted set.

  Let me turn the prediction into a measurement.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Recording this before anything else, and redirecting the agent that's building
  it.
  ⎿  Agent "aab0fe295c2ea283c" had no active task; resumed from transcript 
     in the background with your message. You'll be notified when it 
     finishes. Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-jo
     hnm-Documents-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product
     \bd622822-b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\aab0fe295c2ea283c.output

● I found a recall violation in the surface-consistency pass before it could be 
  reported as working.

  The check rejects when no allomorph combination's literal characters fit
  inside the surface word's character multiset. That premise holds only if
  phonological rules never delete or substitute segments — and deletion is
  precisely what they do.

  The falsifying case, verified in the grammar rather than argued: Indonesian
  pukul has exactly one allomorph, PhoneticShape = "pukul", with no ukul
  variant. Nasal substitution deletes the root-initial stop, so meN- + pukul →
  memukul with no p. The check demands a p against {m:2, e:1, u:2, k:1, l:1},
  finds nothing that fits, and rejects. This morning's census shows memukul with
  1 candidate and 0 empty buckets — HC accepts it.

  That's discarding a valid parse: the one failure this design forbids, and one
  that surfaces in production as silently missing analyses rather than an error.

  Why the existing evidence couldn't have caught it. The membaca bug the agent
  found and patched was the same failure showing through archiphoneme notation —
  excluding notation characters fixed a symptom, not the premise. And the 80.7%
  / 77.4% Amharic reach figures were computed over the doomed set only, so they
  never tested false positives against the accepted set. Reach means nothing
  until soundness holds.

  I've told the agent to make the failure real by running its gate on Indonesian
  rather than take my word for it, to commit the work marked unsound rather
  than lose it, and explicitly not to rescue it by excluding more characters —
  that path already misled us once, and it makes the check detect less while
  leaving the premise false.

  The question I've put to it may well answer "no": whether any sound version
  exists, given that a sound variant would have to count only characters no
  phonological rule can touch — which means analysing the phonology, not reading
  allomorph text. If that isn't cheap, then "the only remaining cheap check is
  unsound" is the honest result, and better than a filter that silently drops
  parses.

✻ Cogitated for 12m 56s

● Background command "Build the surface-consistency pass" completed (exit code
0)

● Build succeeded — the pass compiles. Agent B is running the Indonesian gate;
  rather than duplicate it and contend for slots, let me strengthen the
  diagnosis from the grammar itself.

  Ran 3 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Conclusive, and worse than I thought. Of the Indonesian grammar's phonological
  rules, four of five are deletions (no output segments) — deletion isn't an
  edge case there, it's the majority of the phonology.

  Wrote 1 memory (ctrl+o to expand)

● The only remaining cheap check is unsound, and I can now show it from the 
  grammar rather than argue it.

  Of the Indonesian grammar's five phonological rules, four are deletions —
  rules with no output segments. Deletion isn't an exotic case there; it's the
  bulk of the phonology. Character-multiset containment assumes a morpheme's
  literal characters survive into the surface, and in this grammar they
  routinely don't.

  The falsifying case is concrete and verified in the source data: pukul has
  exactly one allomorph with no ukul variant, nasal substitution deletes the
  root-initial stop, so memukul contains no p. The check demands a p, finds
  nothing that fits, and rejects a candidate HC accepts (1 candidate, 0 empty
  buckets in this morning's census).

  This also invalidates the reach figures as evidence. The 80.7% / 77.4% Amharic
  numbers were computed over the doomed set only, so by construction they could
  never detect a false positive against the accepted set. They measured how
  much the check catches, never what it wrongly catches.

  So the scoreboard for producing a nonzero rejection is now:

  ┌────────────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │            path            │                   status                   │
  ├────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ OwnershipPass              │ vacuous — pins_resolve short-circuits      │
  ├────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ StructuralTransitionPass   │ vacuous — Pruned pre-empts it              │
  ├────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ ExploreMode::Flat          │ refuted — expands the network, identical   │
  │                            │ candidates                                 │
  ├────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Morpheme co-occurrence     │ vacuous on all three grammars (none        │
  │                            │ declared)                                  │
  ├────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Surface consistency        │ unsound — discards valid parses            │
  │ (naive)                    │                                            │
  └────────────────────────────┴────────────────────────────────────────────┘

  A sound variant of the last one exists in principle: exclude every character
  some phonological rule could delete or alter. That means analysing rule
  targets — natural classes, alpha variables — rather than reading allomorph
  text, and it yields a strictly weaker check. Whether enough signal survives to
  be worth anything is the open question, and I've put it to the agent rather
  than assumed the answer.

  I've recorded this in durable memory, because the previous note listed surface
  consistency as the promising path and that would have misled the next
  session.

✻ Churned for 1m 36s

● Agent "Build the Known-fact generator" finished · 44m 1s

● Strong work — all three defects fixed with genuine break-revert-confirm
  cycles, each reporting the actual failure text, suite up to 964 passing. One
  was a real code defect, not just a test gap: recorded_rejections would
  silently verify a truncated prefix once the bounded ledger saturated, which is
  exactly the failure that bites at corpus scale. It also flagged, without
  being asked, an unfixed issue where a forged out-of-range unit index panics
  the verifier rather than returning a typed error — correctly characterised as
  fail-loud rather than fail-silent.

  Now the question that decides whether a sound surface check is worth building
  — how much deletion each grammar actually has:

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)
● Agent "Size the reachable ceiling fraction" finished · 6m 27s

● Sena has zero phonological rules — and that flips the conclusion, if it holds.
  Verifying, because the whole recommendation turns on it.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Confirmed: Sena has no PhonologicalRule element at all — no
  PhonologicalRuleDefinitions, no PhonologicalFeatureSystem. Only 132
  MorphologicalRule and 8 CompoundingRule. Indonesian has 5 phonological rules,
  Amharic 7.

  That means Sena has no phonological rewriting stage to break the containment
  premise. One question remains before I'd call it sound there — whether Sena's
  morphological rules themselves alter root segments:

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● This is the path to a working filter, and it's on the grammar that matters 
  most.

  Sena's morphology uses only CopyFromInput (239) and InsertSegments (239) — no
  modifying or narrowing actions — and it has no phonological rules at all. So
  on Sena, surface material is root text plus inserted affix text, and
  character-multiset containment is genuinely sound. Sena is also the grammar
  with the largest ceiling (93.6% of steps), the worst tail (p99 348 ms), and
  measured surface-consistency reach of 20.2% of removable work.

  The fix isn't to patch the check — it's to make soundness a checked 
  precondition of the grammar, which is the capability-gating pattern this repo
  already uses.
  ⎿  Agent "a18ca98bf9a114fa8" had no active task; resumed from transcript 
     in the background with your message. You'll be notified when it 
     finishes. Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-jo
     hnm-Documents-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product
     \bd622822-b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\a18ca98bf9a114fa8.output

● The unsoundness turns out to be grammar-specific, not fundamental — and it 
  spares the grammar we most need.

  ┌────────────┬─────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────────┐
  │  grammar   │   phonological rules    │   morphological output actions    │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Sena       │ none at all             │ CopyFromInput 239, InsertSegments │
  │            │                         │  239 — nothing else               │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Indonesian │ 5 (4 deletions)         │ —                                 │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────────┼───────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Amharic    │ 7 (4 deletions, 3       │ —                                 │
  │            │ substitutions)          │                                   │
  └────────────┴─────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────────┘

  Sena has no phonological rewriting stage and no modifying morphological
  action, so surface material is root text plus inserted affix text and
  character containment is genuinely sound there. Sena is also the grammar with
  the largest ceiling (93.6% of steps), the worst tail (p99 348 ms), and 20.2%
  of removable work within surface-consistency's reach.

  So the fix isn't to weaken the check — it's to gate it on a proven 
  precondition of the grammar, the same capability-check shape this repo already
  uses. The pass may reject only where the grammar provably cannot delete or
  alter material, and defers everywhere else, which is always safe.

  I deliberately did not let the agent implement that precondition as "no
  PhonologicalRule element" — that's necessary but not sufficient, and I'd be
  handing it my own unverified list. It has to establish sufficiency from the
  model, enumerating the action and rule enums exhaustively so a new variant is
  a compile error rather than a silent "safe". I specifically flagged
  truncation: this repo documents 41 zero-width truncation mrules in Aweti, and
  a subrule whose output fails to copy every input part deletes material exactly
  like a phonological rule does. Sena's 239 subrules each need checking.

  The deliverable I asked for proves both directions: Indonesian's precondition
  must fail with memukul surviving, and Sena's must pass with a non-empty
  rejected set — which would be the first non-vacuous run of the recall gate in
  this project, and the first nonzero achieved saving.

✻ Worked for 2m 19s

● Agent "Build the Known-fact generator" failed: Agent terminated early due to
an API error: You've hit your session limit · resets 8:10pm (America/New_York)
  ⎿  You've hit your session limit · resets 8:10pm (America/New_York)
     /usage-credits to request more usage from your admin.

✻ Churned for 3h 41m 45s

❯ keep going                                                                    

● Agent A hit its session limit mid break-and-verify (resets 8:10pm ET).
  Checking what it left.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● The break it was applying was "force grammar_preserves_segments to always
  return true" — so the sabotage may still be in the tree. Checking that first.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Found it — the sabotage is still in the tree at line 61-62 (true || (...)),
  left mid-verification when the session died. Reverting that first.

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\filter-generator\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\src\candidate_filter\passes\segment_preservation.rs)
  ⎿  Added 2 lines, removed 3 lines
      58  /// check below is conservative on purpose: an out-of-range `Pa
          rtRef`, an unrecognized action shape,
      59  /// a multi-spelling segment, or any doubt at all resolves to `
          false`.
      60  pub fn grammar_preserves_segments(g: &Grammar) -> bool {
      61 -    // DELIBERATE SOUNDNESS BREAK FOR VERIFICATION, reverted be
         -fore commit.                                                   
      62 -    true || (g.prules.is_empty()                               
      61 +    g.prules.is_empty()                                        
      62          && g.mrules.iter().all(mrule_preserves_segments)
      64 -        && g.char_tables.iter().all(every_segment_has_one_spell
         -ing))                                                          
      63 +        && g.char_tables.iter().all(every_segment_has_one_spell
         +ing)                                                           
      64  }
      65  
      66  /// No [`CharDefKind::Segment`] in this table has more than one
           authored representation.

● Reverted. Now the question that decides everything: the agent found a fourth
  hazard empirically — Sena's char4 declares two representations (m/n), so root
  entry832's stored shape "n" surfaces as m in kakamwe with no rule involved at
  all. That's an alternate spelling the alphabet itself declares. As written,
  that disqualifies Sena.

  Let me see how widespread it is, because that decides whether a per-character
  fix recovers Sena.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● My element name guess was wrong — zero matches everywhere. Finding the actual
  schema:

  Ran 2 shell commands (ctrl+o to expand)

● Now the picture is clear, and it changes the design.

  ┌────────────┬─────────────────────┬────────────────────────┐
  │  grammar   │ single-rep segments │       multi-rep        │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────┼────────────────────────┤
  │ Sena       │ 39                  │ 1 (m/n)                │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────┼────────────────────────┤
  │ Indonesian │ 28                  │ 1 (g/G)                │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────┼────────────────────────┤
  │ Amharic    │ 376                 │ 41 (Ethiopic variants) │
  └────────────┴─────────────────────┴────────────────────────┘

  A whole-grammar disqualifier throws Sena away over one segment out of forty.
  The right fix is per-character, not per-grammar: treat every representation of
  a multi-representation segment as unconstrained — never required. That's
  strictly permissive, so it cannot cause a false rejection, and Sena keeps 39
  of 40 segments constraining.

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● The precondition isn't wired into the pipeline yet — agent A died before that.
  Both agents are account-session-limited (resets 8:10pm ET), so a fresh
  subagent would hit the same wall. Implementing the refinement myself and
  handing verification back when they're available.

  Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)
● Implementing the per-character fix. First, the precondition stops
  disqualifying on spelling and instead reports which characters are ambiguous:

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\filter-generator\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\src\candidate_filter\passes\segment_preservation.rs)
  ⎿  Added 21 lines, removed 8 lines
      58  /// check below is conservative on purpose: an out-of-range `Pa
          rtRef`, an unrecognized action shape,
      59  /// a multi-spelling segment, or any doubt at all resolves to `
          false`.
      60  pub fn grammar_preserves_segments(g: &Grammar) -> bool {
      61 -    g.prules.is_empty()                                        
      62 -        && g.mrules.iter().all(mrule_preserves_segments)       
      63 -        && g.char_tables.iter().all(every_segment_has_one_spell
         -ing)                                                           
      61 +    g.prules.is_empty() && g.mrules.iter().all(mrule_preserves_
         +segments)                                                      
      62  }
      63  
      66 -/// No [`CharDefKind::Segment`] in this table has more than one
         - authored representation.                                      
      67 -fn every_segment_has_one_spelling(table: &pg_grammar::chardef::
         -CharDefTable) -> bool {                                        
      68 -    table                                                      
      69 -        .iter()                                                
      70 -        .all(|(_, def)| def.kind() != CharDefKind::Segment || d
         -ef.representations().len() <= 1)                               
      64 +/// Every character spelling any [`CharDefKind::Segment`] that 
         +has more than one authored                                     
      65 +/// representation, so a caller can decline to require any of t
         +hem.                                                           
      66 +///                                                            
      67 +/// Disqualifying a whole grammar over this would be far too bl
         +unt: sena has exactly ONE                                      
      68 +/// multi-representation segment out of 40 (`m`/`n`), and losin
         +g the other 39 segments' constraining                          
      69 +/// power to it is the difference between a check that fires an
         +d one that never does. Excluding only                          
      70 +/// these characters is strictly permissive -- requiring fewer 
         +characters can lose a rejection but                            
      71 +/// can never manufacture a false one.                         
      72 +pub fn ambiguous_segment_chars(g: &Grammar) -> BTreeSet<char> {
      73 +    let mut chars = BTreeSet::new();                           
      74 +    for table in &g.char_tables {                              
      75 +        for (_, def) in table.iter() {                         
      76 +            if def.kind() == CharDefKind::Segment && def.repres
         +entations().len() > 1 {                                        
      77 +                for representation in def.representations() {  
      78 +                    chars.extend(representation.chars());      
      79 +                }                                              
      80 +            }                                                  
      81 +        }                                                      
      82 +    }                                                          
      83 +    chars                                                      
      84  }
      85  
      86  fn mrule_preserves_segments(rule: &MorphRuleDef) -> bool {

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\filter-generator\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\src\candidate_filter\passes\segment_preservation.rs)
  ⎿  Added 2 lines
      45  //! shape) is a different question -- about whether the ROOT's 
          own stored literal text is exact,
      46  //! not about whether a RULE can alter it after the fact -- and
           is out of this precondition's scope.
      47  
      48 +use std::collections::BTreeSet;                                
      49 +                                                               
      50  use pg_grammar::chardef::CharDefKind;
      51  use pg_grammar::model::{
      52      AffixAllomorphDef, CompoundingSubruleDef, Grammar, MorphRul
          eDef, OutputAction, PartRef,

● Now threading the ambiguous set through the surface check so those characters
  are never required:

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\filter-generator\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\src\candidate_filter\passes\surface_consistency.rs)
  ⎿  Added 10 lines, removed 3 lines
      77      counts
      78  }
      79  
      80 -/// `char_multiset`, filtered through [`is_literal_surface_char
         -`].                                                            
      81 -fn required_multiset(text: &str) -> BTreeMap<char, usize> {    
      80 +/// `char_multiset`, filtered through [`is_literal_surface_char
         +`] and `ambiguous`.                                            
      81 +///                                                            
      82 +/// A character spelling a multi-representation segment is neve
         +r required: the author recorded one                            
      83 +/// spelling in the shape, but the alphabet declares another eq
         +ually valid, and the surface may                               
      84 +/// carry either (sena's `m`/`n` realizing root `entry832`'s st
         +ored `"n"` as `m` in `kakamwe`).                               
      85 +fn required_multiset(text: &str, ambiguous: &BTreeSet<char>) ->
         + BTreeMap<char, usize> {                                       
      86      let mut counts = BTreeMap::new();
      83 -    for c in text.chars().filter(|&c| is_literal_surface_char(c
         -)) {                                                           
      87 +    for c in text                                              
      88 +        .chars()                                               
      89 +        .filter(|&c| is_literal_surface_char(c) && !ambiguous.c
         +ontains(&c))                                                   
      90 +    {                                                          
      91          *counts.entry(c).or_insert(0) += 1;
      92      }
      93      counts

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\filter-generator\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\src\candidate_filter\passes\surface_consistency.rs)
  ⎿  Added 2 lines, removed 2 lines
       94  }
       95  
       96  /// An affix allomorph's own literal contribution: only its `I
           nsertSegments` text counts.
       97 -fn affix_literal_multiset(a: &AffixAllomorphDef) -> BTreeMap<c
          -har, usize> {                                                 
       97 +fn affix_literal_multiset(a: &AffixAllomorphDef, ambiguous: &B
          +TreeSet<char>) -> BTreeMap<char, usize> {                     
       98      let mut counts = BTreeMap::new();
       99      for action in &a.rhs {
      100          if let OutputAction::InsertSegments { shape, .. } = ac
           tion {
      101 -            for (&c, &n) in &required_multiset(&shape.text) { 
      101 +            for (&c, &n) in &required_multiset(&shape.text, am
          +biguous) {                                                    
      102                  *counts.entry(c).or_insert(0) += n;
      103              }
      104          }

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\filter-generator\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\src\candidate_filter\passes\surface_consistency.rs)
  ⎿  Added 10 lines, removed 3 lines
      113  }
      114  
      115  /// Every literal-character option one morpheme's owner could 
           contribute; empty means one free option.
      116 -fn literal_char_options(g: &Grammar, owner: Option<MorphemeOwn
          -er>) -> Vec<BTreeMap<char, usize>> {                          
      116 +fn literal_char_options(                                      
      117 +    g: &Grammar,                                              
      118 +    owner: Option<MorphemeOwner>,                             
      119 +    ambiguous: &BTreeSet<char>,                               
      120 +) -> Vec<BTreeMap<char, usize>> {                             
      121      match owner {
      122          Some(MorphemeOwner::LexEntry(le)) => g.entries[le.0 as
            usize]
      123              .allomorphs
      124              .iter()
      121 -            .map(|a| required_multiset(&a.shape.text))        
      125 +            .map(|a| required_multiset(&a.shape.text, ambiguou
          +s))                                                           
      126              .collect(),
      127          Some(MorphemeOwner::MRule(mid)) => match g.mrules[mid.
           0 as usize].affix_allomorphs() {
      124 -            Some(allos) if !allos.is_empty() => allos.iter().m
          -ap(affix_literal_multiset).collect(),                         
      128 +            Some(allos) if !allos.is_empty() => allos         
      129 +                .iter()                                       
      130 +                .map(|a| affix_literal_multiset(a, ambiguous))
      131 +                .collect(),                                   
      132              _ => Vec::new(),
      133          },
      134          None => Vec::new(),

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\filter-generator\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\src\candidate_filter\passes\surface_consistency.rs)
  ⎿  Added 2 lines, removed 1 line
      161  impl SurfaceConsistencyIndex {
      162      pub fn build(g: &Grammar) -> Self {
      163          let owners = build_morpheme_owners(g);
      164 +        let ambiguous = ambiguous_segment_chars(g);           
      165          let per_morpheme = (0..g.morphemes.len())
      165 -            .map(|i| literal_char_options(g, owners[i]))      
      166 +            .map(|i| literal_char_options(g, owners[i], &ambig
          +uous))                                                        
      167              .collect();
      168          Self {
      169              per_morpheme,

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\filter-generator\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\src\candidate_filter\passes\surface_consistency.rs)
  ⎿  Added 3 lines, removed 1 line
      45      RejectionProof, StablePassId, StableRuleId,
      46  };
      47  use crate::candidate_filter::model::CandidateWitness;
      48 -use crate::candidate_filter::passes::segment_preservation::gram
         -mar_preserves_segments;                                        
      48 +use crate::candidate_filter::passes::segment_preservation::{   
      49 +    ambiguous_segment_chars, grammar_preserves_segments,       
      50 +};                                                             
      51  use crate::candidate_filter::passes::CandidateFilterPass;
      52  use crate::candidate_filter::pipeline::FilterContext;
      53  use crate::confirm::{build_morpheme_owners, MorphemeOwner};

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

● Update(~\Documents\repos\PanGloss\.claude\worktrees\filter-generator\rust\crat
        es\pg-foma\src\candidate_filter\passes\surface_consistency.rs)
  ⎿  Added 1 line, removed 1 line
      35  //! char-def's OTHER declared representation) -- not a deletion
           or substitution by any rule, an
      36  //! alternate spelling the alphabet itself allows.
      37  
      38 -use std::collections::BTreeMap;                                
      38 +use std::collections::{BTreeMap, BTreeSet};                    
      39  use std::sync::Arc;
      40  
      41  use pg_grammar::model::{AffixAllomorphDef, Grammar, MorphemeId,
           OutputAction};

  Ran 1 shell command (ctrl+o to expand)

❯ use sonnet subagents to do the work, you verify                               

● Understood — handing back to a subagent now. Let me pass along exactly what I
  changed so it verifies rather than re-derives.
  ⎿  Agent "a18ca98bf9a114fa8" had no active task; resumed from transcript 
     in the background with your message. You'll be notified when it 
     finishes. Output: C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-jo
     hnm-Documents-repos-PanGloss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product
     \bd622822-b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf0919e7\tasks\a18ca98bf9a114fa8.output

● Back to the agent for execution. Two things I did while it was
  session-limited, both flagged to it for independent verification rather than
  trust:

  Its deliberate soundness break was still live in the tree. It died
  mid-verification with grammar_preserves_segments forced to true || (...). Had
  that been committed and run, the pass would have certified every grammar and
  rejected valid parses on Indonesian — the precise failure the precondition
  exists to prevent. Reverted, and I've asked it to grep the worktree for any
  other survivor.

  The precondition as written would have disqualified Sena and produced another 
  null result. Measuring the segment definitions showed why:

  ┌────────────┬─────────────────────┬───────────┐
  │  grammar   │ single-rep segments │ multi-rep │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────┼───────────┤
  │ Sena       │ 39                  │ 1 (m/n)   │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────┼───────────┤
  │ Indonesian │ 28                  │ 1 (g/G)   │
  ├────────────┼─────────────────────┼───────────┤
  │ Amharic    │ 376                 │ 41        │
  └────────────┴─────────────────────┴───────────┘

  A grammar-level disqualifier throws Sena away over one segment in forty — and
  Sena is the grammar with the 93.6% ceiling and the 348 ms tail. So I made it
  per-character: multi-representation segments are never required, rather than
  fatal to the whole grammar. Requiring fewer characters can lose a rejection
  but cannot manufacture a false one. I asked the agent to check that argument
  and say if it disagrees, since its own kakamwe finding is what motivated it.

  Worth noting what the agent found that I'd missed: Indonesian's memukul
  deletion is a morphological action, not a phonological rule. My mechanism was
  wrong even though the conclusion held — "no PhonologicalRule" would have
  certified Indonesian and rejected a valid parse. It also discovered the
  multi-spelling hazard empirically, via its own recall gate on kakamwe, rather
  than by reasoning ahead.

  The deliverable is now sharp: Indonesian and Amharic preconditions must fail,
  Sena's must pass with a non-empty rejected set. That would be the first
  non-vacuous run of the recall gate and the first nonzero achieved saving in
  this project.

✻ Worked for 14m 45s

● Background command "Build the per-character refinement" completed (exit code
0)

● Build succeeded (exit 0) — the per-character refinement compiles, and the
  agent has already picked it up and documented the rationale itself rather than
  just accepting my edit.

  One stale claim I'll hold it to when it reports: grammar_preserves_segments's
  doc still says it certifies "every segment's own spelling" and that "a
  multi-spelling segment... resolves to false". That's no longer true — the
  function doesn't consult char tables at all now. Under this repo's comment
  policy that's a bare claim about behaviour that doesn't exist, and it's the
  kind of drift that misleads the next reader into thinking spelling is still a
  disqualifier.

  Where the goal stands. The pipeline is landed on main and measured; the
  missing piece is a single nonzero rejection. Today's work narrowed that to one
  specific, testable claim:

  - Both structural passes: proven vacuous (they duplicate checks the production
  path already makes).
  - ExploreMode::Flat: refuted — expands the network, identical candidates.
  - Co-occurrence: vacuous on all three grammars (none declare it).
  - Surface consistency: unsound in general, but sound on Sena specifically — no
  phonological rules, morphology limited to CopyFromInput/InsertSegments, and
  the one multi-spelling segment now handled per-character rather than fatally.

  Sena is also the grammar that most needs it: 93.6% ceiling, p99 confirm 348
  ms, ~178 candidates/word at 98.1% empty buckets, with 20.2% of removable work
  in reach.

  The agent is proving all three directions — Indonesian and Amharic must fail
  the precondition with memukul surviving, Sena must pass with a non-empty 
  rejected set — plus a break-and-verify it must revert before running out this
  time. If Sena's precondition still fails, I've asked for the specific check
  and reason rather than a workaround, because that would be decisive rather
  than a setback.

✻ Worked for 23s

❯ /export                                                                       
  ⎿  Conversation exported to: C:\Users\johnm\Documents\repos\PanGloss.claude\wo
     rktrees\circumfix-cross-product\2026-08-13-015119-plan-complete-and-indepen
     dently-luna-reviewed-go.txt

❯ /exit                                                                         

❯ /handoff                                                                      

  Made 1 scratchpad edit +146 (ctrl+o to expand)

● Handoff written to the OS temp scratchpad (not the workspace):

  C:\Users\johnm\AppData\Local\Temp\claude\C--Users-johnm-Documents-repos-PanGlo
  ss--claude-worktrees-circumfix-cross-product\bd622822-b7bf-4966-8dc9-b14ccf091
  9e7\scratchpad\HANDOFF-candidate-filter-2026-08-13.md

  It references rather than repeats the durable artifacts — the plan and
  contract docs, commits 08dc8993 / 6f255902 / d1b9490c, and task metadata
  #21/#22/#24/#25, which already carry every measured number.

  What it captures that exists nowhere else:

  - The unmet bar, stated plainly — the pipeline is landed and measured, but
  achieved saving is 0.00% and one recall-safe rejection is what "working"
  means.
  - Exact state of the two agent worktrees, including which files are
  uncommitted in filter-generator and what the in-flight subagent owes
  (Indonesian/Amharic must fail the precondition, Sena must pass with a
  non-empty rejected set).
  - The one live design idea — soundness as a checked precondition of the
  grammar — with the grammar facts a fresh agent would otherwise spend an hour
  re-measuring.
  - Six evidence traps that each recurred, most importantly that a subset
  assertion over an empty set and a gate never seen to fail both prove nothing.
  - Operational hazards: five subagent stalls on self-spawned background jobs,
  two session-limit deaths with uncommitted work (one leaving a live soundness
  break in the tree), and the resume-via-SendMessage recovery.
  - The uncommitted work in the main checkout that is not ours — the Mbugwe
  budget raise you asked me to keep — with backup patch paths and the warning
  that git stash is shared across worktrees.
  - One stale doc claim in grammar_preserves_segments still owed by the agent.

  Suggested skills: grill-with-docs (which you named in the goal),
  code-comments, dead-end-census, and conformance-grammars.

  One caveat on the handoff's accuracy: the in-flight subagent may land results
  after this was written, so a fresh session should check filter-generator's git
  log before assuming the uncommitted-file list is current.
✻ Baked for 1m 19s